Indian Heart Journal 6403 (2012) 270--272 Composite risk scores for
acute coronary syndromes K. Sarat Chandra\* Department of Cardiology,
Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad, India. There have been
considerable advances in the management of acute coronary syndromes in
the recent past. There are three risk scoring systems used for
prognosticating these patients. An attempt is made in this article to
discuss the pros and cons of the different risk scoring systems and
their clinical utility. In any field of medicine, risk stratification is
of utmost importance, particularly so while dealing with patients who
are acutely sick, like those presenting with acute coronary syndromes
(ACS). This not only enables the physician to prognosticate the illness
but also to decide the mode and urgency of therapy. The management of
ACS has received a great attention in the last decade or so. The debate
of conservative vs. early invasive therapy continues but slowly the
physicians are coming round to the view point that early invasive
therapy is safe and saves more lives as seen in the ISAR-COOL and TIMACS
trials.1,2 In fact, the major benefit of early invasive therapy is
largely restricted to those at high-risk as assessed by one of the
commonly used risk scoring systems. There are three commonly used risk
scoring systems for ACS: 1. TIMI scoring system This is a simple scoring
system and can be used bedside. It has originated from the thrombolysis
in myocardial infarction (TIMI) 11b trial and was later validated in
many important trials like TACTICS-TIMI 18 trial.3,4 The scoring system
gives one mark to each of the following: 1. Age \> 65 years 2. Presence
of more than three conventional risk factors 3. Use of aspirin in the
previous 1 week before ACS 4. Elevated cardiac biomarkers 5.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) changes of ST-deviation 6. Angiography showing
\> 50% lesion 7. More than two episodes of angina in the last 24 hours.
The TIMI score predicts the prognosis before discharge and at 14 days.
The combined endpoint of death/myocardial OR = 0.55 CI (0.33, 0.91)

CONS Death/MI/ACS rehosp (%)

Introduction

INV

35

OR = 0.75 CI (0.57, 1.00)

30 25

20.3

20 15

30.6

19.5 16.1

11.8

12.8

Low

0--2

10 5 0 Intermed 3--4

High

5--7

TIMI risk score % of pts:

25%

60%

15%

Use of the TIMI risk score for UA/NSTEMI to predict the benefit of an
early invasive strategy. In a prospectively defined analysis, the TIMI
risk score was applied in the Treat Angina with Aggrastat and determine
Cost of Therapy with an Invasive or Conservative Strategy (TACTICS-TIMI
18 trial. As shown, 75% of patients had a risk score of three or higher,
and a significant benefit of an invasive strategy was observed in these
patients). (Data from Cannan CP, Weintraub WS, Demopoulos LA, et al.
Comparison of early invasive and conservative strategy in unstable
coronary syndromes treated with Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor
Tirofiban. NEJM 2001;344:1879--87). CI: confidence interval, CONS:
conservative, INV: invasive, MI: myocardial infarction, OR: odds ratio,
TIMI: thrombolysis in myocardial infarction. infarction (MI)/UR at 14
days has increased from 4.7% with 0/1 risk factor to 40.9% at 6/7 risk
factors, a gradient of ten times as shown in Figure 2. The problem with
TIMI risk scoring is that subtle discrimination with this scoring system
is not possible, also it has not been shown to discriminate the effect
of revascularisation. All the same, its simplicity makes it an
attractive and useful beside tool. 2. GRACE scoring system The Global
Registry of Acute Coronary Events (GRACE) scoring system is the latest
and has originated from GRACE registry data.5 It is a relatively complex
scoring system and needs a computer or personal digital assistant for
proper calculation. This system has incorporated more dynamic features
like heart rate, blood pressure, survival from cardiac arrest, serum
creatinine, and Killips class. The detailed scoring system is given
below in Table 1. 3. PURSUIT scoring system The PURSUIT scoring system
predicts 30-day-risk and incorporates information from early vital
signs.6 It comprises of age, gender, worst Canadian Cardiovascular
Society (CCS) angina class in previous 6 weeks, heart rate, systolic
blood pressure, signs of heart failure, and ST-depression. The PURSUIT
scoring system has not gained much popularity. A comparison of the three
scoring systems is shown in Table. In an interesting study published in
European Heart Journal, Gonçalves et al. from Portugal have applied the
three scoring systems TIMI, GRACE, and PURSUIT to the same group of 460
patients admitted to a single centre.7 They have looked at short-term as
well as long-term mortality. They have

clearly demonstrated that GRACE score was the best in predicting the
risk of death or MI at 1 year after admission. There was a significant
interaction between the benefit of myocardial revascularisation during
initial hospitalisation and the extent of risk evaluated by GRACE and
PURSUIT scores. In this issue of Indian Heart Journal, Prabhudesai et
al. from St. John's Medical College and Hospital, Bengaluru have
presented the clinical data of 235 patients of ACS and attempted
validation of GRACE risk score.8 St. John's Medical College and Hospital
is a large tertiary care hospital which caters predominantly to low and
middle-class population. This group of authors has well established
credentials for clinical research. They have applied GRACE risk score to
a cohort of patients which included ST-elevation myocardial infarction
(STEMI) and non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI). Their study
has clearly validated most of the risk markers of GRACE score. Only one
patient had cardiac arrest at presentation, hence this factor could not
be assessed. The increase in heart rate tended to show a correlation
with risk but it was not statistically significant. All other variables
of GRACE risk score have shown excellent correlation. A GRACE risk score
of 217 has emerged as a good cut-off point of risk stratification. They
Table Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events risk score. GRACE

Age (yr)

Score

(0--258)

\< 40 40--49 50--59 60--69 70--79 \> 80

0 18 36 55 73 91

Heart rate (bpm)

\< 70 170--89 190--109 110--149 150--199 \> 200

0 7 13 23 36 46

Systolic BP (mmHg)

\< 80 180--99 100--119 120--139 140--159 160--199 \> 200

63 58 47 37 26 11 0

Creatimine (mg/dL)

0.0--0.39 0.5--0.79 0.8--1.19 1.2--1.59 1.6--1.99 0.2--3.99 \>4

2 5 8 11 14 23 31

60 P \<0.001x2 for trend D/MI/UR by 14 days (%)

50 40.9 40 30

26.2 19.9

20 13.2 10

8.3 4.7

0 0/1 2 3 4 6 6/7 Risk score (No. of TIMI risk factors) Time risk
factors • Age ≥65 yrs • ≥ 3 CAD risk factors • Known CAD (\>50%
stenosis)

• Prior aspirin • ≥ 2 anginal episodes in prior 24 hr • ST deviation ≥
0.5 mm of presenting ECG • ↑ Cardiac markers

Figure Thrombolysis in myocardial ischaemia risk score for unstable
angina or non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (UA/NSTEMI). The risk
factors are shown at the bottom, and the risk of death (D), myocardial
infarction, or urgent revascularisation is shown along the vertical
axis. (Modified from Antman EM, Cohen M, Bernink PJLM, et al. The TIMI
risk score for unstable angina/non-ST elevation MI: a method for
prognostication and therapeutic decision-making. JAMA 2000;284:835).
CAD: coronary artery disease, ECG: electrocardiogram, TIMI: thrombolysis
in myocardial infarction. Killip class Class I Class II Class III Class
IV

0 21 43 64

Cardiac arrest at admission

43

Elevated cardiac markers

15

ST-segment deviation

30

BP: blood pressure, GRACE: Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events.

Table A comparison of a three composite scoring system for acute
coronary syndrome. Variables

TIMI

GRACE

PURSUIT

Age Gender Conventional risk factors Angina Aspirin in the previous 1
week before ACS Heart rate Systolic BP Cardiac arrest at presentation
ECG changes Killips class Biomarkers Serum creatinine Angiography

≥ 65 yr Not considered ≥ 3 risk factors ≥ one episode of rest angina in
≤ 24 hr

Risk increases in age 40--80 Not considered

Risk increases in age 50--80 Male 1.0 Worst CCS class

 Score increases from 70--200 Rising BP reduces the score     

   (stenosis \> 50%)

 

ACS: acute coronary syndrome, BP: blood pressure, CCS: Canadian
Cardiovascular Society, ECG: electrocardiogram, GRACE: Global Registry
of Acute Coronary Events, TIMI: thrombolysis in myocardial infarction.

also found a good correlation between GRACE score and extent of coronary
artery disease (CAD) at angiography. There are a few caveats though. The
exact basis for choosing patients for coronary angiogram is not clear.
Is it the financial capacity of the patients? A slightly greater number
of patients have undergone coronary angiography among patients with
lower GRACE score. There is no information on whether ejection fraction
(EF) has any correlation with GRACE score. Also, the impact of
revascularisation on prognosis and correlation with GRACE score is not
clear. Nonetheless, the authors should be congratulated for an excellent
study and this should encourage other hospitals to adopt risk scoring
system while dealing with patients of ACS. Despite the availability of
these above composite risk scores one cannot get away from the fact that
there is a need for more inclusive risk scoring systems. Each of these
scoring systems has avoided some factors. Important prognostic factors
like anaemia, C-reactive protein, extent of CAD, left ventricular
ejection fraction (LVEF), and so on, are not included in any of the
above systems.
