Kutkiene et al. Lipids in Health and Disease (2018) 17:233
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12944-018-0883-5

RESEARCH

Open Access

Cardiovascular risk assessment of dyslipidemic middle-aged adults
without overt cardiovascular disease over the period of 2009--2016 in
Lithuania Sandra Kutkiene1,3,4\*, Zaneta Petrulioniene1,3,4, Aleksandras
Laucevicius1,3,4, Pranas Serpytis1,3,4, Vytautas Kasiulevicius2,3,4,
Justina Staigyte3, Akvile Saulyte3, Emilija Petrulionyte3, Urte
Gargalskaite3,4, Egle Skiauteryte3,4, Gabija Matuzeviciene3,4, Milda
Kovaite4 and Egidija Rinkuniene1,3,4

Abstract Background: Cardiovascular mortality in Lithuania is extremely
high and abnormal lipid levels are very common among Lithuanian adults.
Dyslipidemia is one of the main independent risk factors for
cardiovascular diseases (CVD) leading to high absolute CVD risk. The aim
of this study was to assess CVD risk in dyslipidemic middle-aged
subjects. Methods: During the period of 2009--2016 a total of 92,373
people (58.4% women and 41.6% men) were evaluated. This study included
men aged 40--54 and women aged 50--64 without overt CVD. Results: Any
type of dyslipidemia was present in 89.7% of all study population. 7.5%
of dyslipidemic patients did not have any other conventional risk
factors. Three and more risk factors were detected in 60.1% of
dyslipidemic subjects. All analyzed risk factors, except smoking, were
more common in dyslipidemic adults compared to subjects without
dyslipidemia: arterial hypertension (55.8% vs. 43.3%, p \< 0.001),
diabetes (11.1% vs. 7.3%, p \< 0.001), abdominal obesity (45.3% vs.
30.2%, p \< 0.001), BMI ≥30 kg/m2 (35.8% vs. 23.7%, p \< 0.001),
metabolic syndrome (34.0% vs. 9.2%, p \< 0.001), family history of
coronary heart disease (26.3% vs. 23.1%, p \< 0.001), unbalanced diet
(62.5% vs. 52.9%, p \< 0.001) and insufficient physical activity (52.0%
vs. 44.2%, p \< 0.001). The prevalence of all evaluated risk factors,
except smoking, increased with age. Average SCORE index was 1.87 in all
study population, while dyslipidemic subjects had higher SCORE compared
to control group (1.95 vs 1.20, p \< 0.001). Conclusions: Almost two
thirds of dyslipidemic middle-aged Lithuanian adults without overt
cardiovascular disease had three or more other CVD risk factors, which
synergistically increase absolute risk of CVD. The average 10-year risk
of CVD death in patients with dyslipidemia was 1.95%. The importance of
managing dyslipidemia as well as other risk factors in order to reduce
burden of cardiovascular disease in Lithuania is evident. Keywords:
Dyslipidemia, Cardiovascular risk, Primary prevention, Clustering of
risk factors, Middle-aged population, SCORE

\* Correspondence: sandra.kutkiene@santa.lt 1 Vilnius University,
Faculty of Medicine, Clinic of Cardiac and Vascular Diseases, Vilnius,
Lithuania 3 Vilnius University, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius, Lithuania
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article ©
The Author(s). 2018 Open Access This article is distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes
were made. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver
(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data
made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.

Kutkiene et al. Lipids in Health and Disease (2018) 17:233

Background Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a major cause of premature
death in Lithuania as more than a half of all deaths (56.2%) were caused
by CVD in 2016 \[1\]. Our country has the highest level of deaths from
coronary heart disease (CHD) in Europe \[2\] and is classified as
high-risk country in 2016 European guidelines on CVD prevention \[3\].
The main risk factors for CVD are elevated levels of blood lipids, high
blood pressure, tobacco use, diabetes mellitus, unhealthy eating habits,
low physical activity, overweight and obesity \[4\]. Dyslipidemia is one
of the most important modifiable risk factors described more than half a
century ago \[5\]. The association between increased lipid
concentrations and the risk of CVD is well established \[6\] and the
causal relationship is supported by strong epidemiological evidence of
efficacy of lipid lowering therapy in reducing the incidence of CHD
\[7\]. Dyslipidemia is often found together with multiple other
cardiovascular risk factors, especially hypertension and obesity \[8\].
It is well known that coexisting multiple risk factors tend to increase
the CVD risk synergistically because of additional adverse effect on the
vascular endothelium \[9, 10\]. Estimated prevalence of dyslipidemia in
Lithuania is very high (88.8%) according to Lithuanian High
Cardiovascular Risk programme data analysis \[11\]. It is settled that
prevention is effective in reducing the impact of CVD and one of the
main measures is lowering increased levels of modifiable cardiovascular
risk factors \[12\]. Despite positive changes in prevalence of adult
arterial hypertension (AH) in Lithuania, the cardiovascular risk of the
population still remains high \[13, 14\]. While continuing the positive
trends, nowadays all the efforts should be focused on management of
dyslipidemia. The aim of our study was to assess cardiovascular risk
profile of middle-aged Lithuanian adults with and without dyslipidemia
in order to broadly analyze the importance of this major CVD risk
factor. Methods Study population and measurements

The Lithuanian High Cardiovascular Risk (LitHiR) primary prevention
programme, funded by the Ministry of Health, was started in 2006. The
Local Research Ethics Committee's approval was obtained. During the
period of 2009--2016 a total of 92,373 people (58.4% women and 41.6%
men) were evaluated. This study included men aged 40--54 and women aged
50--64 without overt cardiovascular disease. Subjects were divided into
two groups by their dyslipidemia status -- dyslipidemic and
non-dyslipidemic. Their risk factors and lipid profile assessment were
obtained and used for statistical analysis. Study data has been further
analyzed by dividing all subjects into appropriate groups by the age,
men: 40--

Page 2 of 9

44 years, 45--49 years, 50--54 years and women: 50-- 54 years, 55--59
years, 60--64 years. Dyslipidemia was considered if serum total
cholesterol (TC) \> 5 mmol/L, or low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol
(LDL-C) \> 3 mmol/L, or high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) \<
1.0 mmol/L in men and \< 1.2 mmol/L in women, or triglycerides (TG) \>
1.7 mmol/L. Metabolic syndrome (MS) was assessed according to the
National Cholesterol Education Program III modified criteria \[15\].
Arterial hypertension (AH) was defined as systolic blood pressure ≥ 140
mmHg and/or diastolic blood pressure ≥ 90 mmHg, or the diagnosis of
hypertension was documented in a medical record. Obesity was identified
whenever body mass index (BMI) ≥30 and abdominal obesity was determined
when waist circumference was \> 102 cm for men and \> 88 cm for women.
The overall cardiovascular risk was calculated according to the risk
estimation Systematic Coronary Risk Evaluation (SCORE) system \[16\]. A
detailed description of the Lithuanian High Cardiovascular Risk
programme protocol is presented in Laucevicius et al. paper \[17\].
Statistical analysis

For continuous variables, the following descriptive statistics are
reported: means, standard deviations (SD) and 95% confidence interval
(CI). For categorical data frequencies are reported. In the case of
dichotomous categorical variables, we also provide confidence intervals
for proportions of interest (e.g. diabetes, smoking, etc.). These
intervals were obtained using the relationship between beta and binomial
distributions. Categorical variables were compared with the help of the
chi-square test. All reported p-values are two-tailed. The level of
significance was set to 0.05.

Results Sample characteristics and cardiovascular risk profile of
subjects with and without dyslipidemia

This study included 92,373 adults without overt cardiovascular disease
-- 53,961 (58.4%) women and 38,412 (41.6%) men. The average age of the
sample group was 52.15 (±6.21) years. Women and men varied in age
because of different study enrollment criteria. Baseline characteristics
and prevalence of cardiovascular risk factors of the whole study
population are shown in Table 1. 81.7% of subjects had TC \> 5 mmol/L,
79.3% had LDL-C \> 3 mmol/L, 30.4% had TG \> 1.7 mmol/L and 13.7% had
low HDL-C (\< 1.0 mmol/L in men and \< 1.2 mmol/L in women). Any type of
dyslipidemia was diagnosed in 89.7% of middle-aged adults without overt
cardiovascular disease. Group with dyslipidemia consists of 82,893
(89.7%) subjects and group without dyslipidemia includes 9480 (10.3%)
adults. All the major risk factors, including AH, abdominal obesity, MS,
DM and

Kutkiene et al. Lipids in Health and Disease (2018) 17:233

Page 3 of 9

Table 1 Baseline characteristics and trends of cardiovascular risk
factors in study population Total (n = 92,373)

Patients with dyslipidemia (n = 82,893)

p-value

Patients without dyslipidemia (n = 9480)

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

Mean

SD

Age (years)

52.15

6.21

52.34

6.20

50.54

6.05

\< 0.001

Waist circumference (cm)

93.72

13.52

94.07

13.53

90.64

13.08

\< 0.001

BMI (kg/m2)

28.60

5.41

28.78

5.39

27.04

5.38

\< 0.001

SBP (mmHg)

133.52

16.33

133.87

16.39

130.43

15.44

\< 0.001

DBP (mmHg)

82.76

9.48

82.95

9.50

81.15

9.14

\< 0.001

HR (beats/min.)

71.95

8.78

72.00

8.78

71.50

8.72

\< 0.001

Fasting glucose (mmol/l)

5.52

1.22

5.54

1.23

5.35

1.08

\< 0.001

TC (mmol/l)

6.08

1.21

6.28

1.12

4.40

0.45

\< 0.001

LDL-C (mmol/l)

3.87

1.08

4.04

1.00

2.42

0.43

\< 0.001

HDL-C (mmol/l)

1.54

0.46

1.54

0.47

1.58

0.37

\< 0.001

TG (mmol/l)

1.59

1.16

1.66

1.19

0.93

0.31

\< 0.001

Non-HDL-C

4.54

1.21

4.74

1.11

2.83

0.48

\< 0.001

TG /HDL

1.22

1.55

1.29

1.62

0.63

0.28

\< 0.001

SCORE index

1.87

1.68

1.95

1.71

1.20

1.18

\< 0.001

Frequencies

n

\%

N

\%

n

\%

DM (%)

9897

10.7%

9207

11.1%

690

7.3%

\< 0.001

AH (%)

50,317

54.5%

46,216

55.8%

4101

43.3%

\< 0.001

Abdominal obesity (%)

40,408

43.7%

37,547

45.3%

2861

30.2%

\< 0.001

Smoking (%)

21,218

23.0%

18,703

22.6%

2515

26.5%

\< 0.001

MS (%)

29,094

31.5%

28,219

34.0%

875

9.2%

\< 0.001

RF ≥ 3 (%)

53,971

58.4%

49,819

60.1%

4152

43.8%

\< 0.001

Familial CHD (%)

24,025

26.0%

21,837

26.3%

2188

23.1%

\< 0.001

Unbalanced diet (%)

56,800

61.5%

51,783

62.5%

5017

52.9%

\< 0.001

Insufficient physical activity (%)

47,268

51.2%

43,074

52.0%

4194

44.2%

\< 0.001

BMI \< 25 (kg/m2) (%)

24,891

26.9%

21,037

25.4%

3854

40.7%

\< 0.001

BMI 25--30 (kg/m ) (%)

35,589

38.5%

32,209

38.9%

3380

35.7%

\< 0.001

BMI 30--40 (kg/m2) (%)

28,778

31.2%

26,776

32.3%

2002

21.1%

\< 0.001

3115

3.4%

2871

3.5%

244

2.6%

\< 0.001

2

2

BMI \> 40 (kg/m ) (%)

SD standard deviation, BMI body mass index, SBP systolic blood pressure,
DBP diastolic blood pressure, HR heart rate, TC total cholesterol, LDL-C
low density lipoprotein cholesterol, HDL-C high density lipoprotein
cholesterol, TG triglycerides, DM diabetes mellitus, AH arterial
hypertension, MS metabolic syndrome, RF risk factors, CHD coronary heart
disease

obesity, except for smoking, were more prevalent in patients with
dyslipidemia compared to patients without it (p \< 0.001) (Table 1).
Average SCORE index of the whole study population was 1.87, patients
with dyslipidemia had higher SCORE compared to control group (Table 1).
Cardiovascular risk assessment in middle-aged men with and without
dyslipidemia

This study included 38,412 men aged 40--54: 33403 (87.0%) with
dyslipidemia and 5009 (13.0%) without dyslipidemia. Mean value of TC in
men was 6.07 ± 1.10 mmol/l, LDL-C

-- 3.92 ± 0.98 mmol/l, HDL-C -- 1.39 ± 0.47 mmol/l and TG -- 1.86 ± 1.45
mmol/l. Prevalence of different cardiovascular risk factors in
dyslipidemic and non-dyslipidemic men is presented in Fig. 1. Men with
dyslipidemia had all main risk factors, except smoking, significantly
more often compared to males without dyslipidemia: AH (49.6% vs. 36.6%,
p \< 0.001), DM (10.8% vs. 6.6%, p \< 0.001), abdominal obesity (30.1%
vs. 16.2%, p \< 0.001), MS (29.8% vs. 4.8%, p \< 0.001) and obesity
(30.3% vs. 16.1%, p \< 0.001). The prevalence of DM, AH, abdominal
obesity, MS and obesity increased with age in both dyslipidemic and
non-dyslipidemic men

Kutkiene et al. Lipids in Health and Disease (2018) 17:233

Page 4 of 9

Fig. 1 Prevalence of different cardiovascular risk factors in men of
different age with and without dyslipidemia

groups. Males with dyslipidemia had higher prevalence of DM, AH,
abdominal obesity, MS and obesity in all age groups in comparison with
control group (Fig. 1). Smoking was more prevalent in men aged 40--54
without dyslipidemia compared to group with dyslipidemia (41.8% vs.
40.3%, p \< 0.001). The highest frequency of smoking in males without
dyslipidemia was observed in 45--49-year-olds (43.8%) followed by 50-55y
(42.4%) and 40-44y (39.6%) groups. Prevalence of smoking was lower in
men older than 50 years compared to younger males in both dyslipidemic
and non-dyslipidemic groups (Fig. 1). Also, men with dyslipidemia tended
to have family history of CHD, unbalanced diet and insufficient physical
activity more often compared to men without dyslipidemia (23.9% vs.
20.6%, p \< 0.001; 65.5% vs. 54.1%, p \< 0.001; 47.3% vs. 39.5%, p \<
0.001, respectively). Cardiovascular risk assessment in middle-aged
women with and without dyslipidemia

This study included 53,961 women aged 50--64: 49490 (91.7%) with
dyslipidemia and 4471 (8.3%) without dyslipidemia. Mean laboratory
values of women were: TC -- 6.41 ± 1.11 mmol/l, LDL-C -- 4.12 ± 1.01
mmol/l HDL-C -- 1.63 ±

0.45 mmol/l and TG -- 1.53 ± 0.96 mmol/l. Prevalence of different
cardiovascular risk factors in dyslipidemic and non-dyslipidemic women
of different age is shown on Fig. 2. Women aged 50--64 with dyslipidemia
had all main cardiovascular risk factors significantly more frequently
compared to females without dyslipidemia (DM (11.3% vs. 8.0%, p \<
0.001), AH (59.9% vs. 50.7%, p \< 0.001), abdominal obesity (55.6% vs.
45.8%, p \< 0.001), smoking (10.6% vs. 9.4%, p \< 0.001), MS (36.9% vs.
14.2%, p \< 0.05) and obesity (39.5% vs. 32.1%, p \< 0.001)). The
prevalence of DM, AH, abdominal obesity, MS and obesity increased with
age in both dyslipidemic and non-dyslipidemic groups. Subjects with
dyslipidemia had higher prevalence of DM, AH, abdominal obesity, MS and
obesity in all age groups in comparison with control group (Fig. 2).
Women with dyslipidemia reported smoking more often in all age groups
compared to women without dyslipidemia (p \< 0.001). Frequency of
smoking was lower in older women in both dyslipidemic and
non-dyslipidemic groups compared to younger females (Fig. 2).
Dyslipidemia and concomitant risk factors

Adults with dyslipidemia more often had ≥3 concomitant risk factors in
comparison with control group (60.1% vs.

Kutkiene et al. Lipids in Health and Disease (2018) 17:233

Fig. 2 Prevalence of different cardiovascular risk factors in women of
different age with and without dyslipidemia

Fig. 3 Distribution of the number of cardiovascular risk factors in
study population

Page 5 of 9

Kutkiene et al. Lipids in Health and Disease (2018) 17:233

43.8%, p \< 0.001). Across the study population adults without
dyslipidemia tended to have less risk factors while women and men with
dyslipidemia had bigger number of cardiovascular risk factors (Fig. 3).
7.5% of dyslipidemic and 13.2% of non-dyslipidemic patients did not have
any other conventional risk factors. The distribution of the number of
cardiovascular risk factors in study cohort is presented in Fig. 3.

Discussion Numerous studies have established dyslipidemia \[18\],
arterial hypertension \[19\], smoking \[20\] and diabetes mellitus
\[21\] as main independent cardiovascular risk factors. Modifying them
is proven to be the key approach to lower cardiovascular mortality \[7,
22, 23\]. More than 90% of acute coronary events occur in individuals
with at least one expressed risk factor \[24\]. Dyslipidemia was
responsible for 15.1% of CVD death risk in the EURIKA population \[25\].
The prevalence of dyslipidemia differs widely according to social,
economic, ethnic and cultural aspects of specific population groups. It
varies between 34.0--41.9% in China \[26, 27\], an estimated 53.0% of
adults in the USA \[28\], 76.4% in German adults \[29\] and 79.0% in
India \[30\]. According to previous studies in Lithuania,
hypercholesterolemia was present in 51.3% women and 52.2% men aged 25--
64 years (CINDI) and 81% men and 87% women aged 35--64 in MONICA study
\[31, 32\]. In our study, prevalence of dyslipidemia in middle-aged
Lithuanians was 89.5% in 2016, slightly increasing from 2009 (89.1%) as
reported by LitHiR programme. This data was consistent with the results
of EURIKA study where prevalence of dyslipidemia was 89.4% in primary
prevention centers across Europe \[25\]. Cigarette smoking is one of the
most important modifiable cardiovascular risk factors as it accounts for
about 36% of the population attributable risk of acute myocardial
infarction \[33\]. Smoking is related to alterations in serum lipid
profile, especially with reduction low HDL-C \[34, 35\]. Some of the
previous studies reported that smoking causes an increase in TC, LDL-C,
triglycerides, while other studies have presented results of smoking
decreasing levels of TC and LDL-C \[36, 37\]. Possible reasons for these
inconsistencies of studies' results could be ethnic differences, age,
gender, different diet, lifestyle and other factors \[38\]. Our study
found the trend of higher prevalence of smoking in non-dyslipidemic men
gender-specific, as men without dyslipidemia smoked significantly more
often compared to men with dyslipidemia, while women with dyslipidemia
smoked more frequently compared to non-dyslipidemic females. Some of
researchers have suggested that association of smoking with the risk of
dyslipidemia is stronger in women than

Page 6 of 9

in men and women who smoke could be more susceptible to develop
dyslipidemia than men smokers \[34\]. The prevalence of obesity, MS and
type 2 diabetes is rising at alarming rates and increasing the cost of
obesity-related medical care \[39\]. Research referring to association
between obesity and dyslipidemia is not definite: some studies found
that dyslipidemia correlated with BMI in men and waist circumference in
women \[40\] while others described associations between waist
circumference and dyslipidemia in both males and females whereas
relationship between BMI and abnormal lipid levels was significant only
in women \[41, 42\]. Our study showed that subjects with dyslipidemia
tended to have MS as well as abdominal obesity significantly more often
in comparison with control group. With increasing overweight and obesity
class, there is an increase in the frequency of dyslipidemia: Nguyen et
al. found that prevalence of dyslipidemia was 8.9% in normal weight (BMI
\< 25) adults and 19% in obesity class III (BMI ≥40) with highest
prevalence of dyslipidemia in obesity class II (BMI 35--39.9) (20.6%)
\[43\]. In our study population, adults with dyslipidemia most often
were overweight (38.9%), followed by obesity class I-II (32.3%),
subjects with normal weight (25.4%) and obesity class III (3.5%).
Diabetes is associated with atherogenic dyslipidemia, which could be one
of the major determinants of high cardiovascular risk in patients with
DM \[44\]. In this study, adults with dyslipidemia had DM more often
compared to non-dyslipidemic subjects. Therefore, managing diabetic
dyslipidemia requires an integrated approach: lifestyle changes and
combined pharmacological interventions are the most important treatment
strategies \[45\]. Dyslipidemia and hypertension are the two most
prevalent as well as most commonly co-existing major cardiovascular risk
factors \[9, 46\]. Abnormal lipid levels are one of the earliest
metabolic disturbances in adults with hypertension, occurring in more
than one-third of hypertensive patients \[46\]. Dyslipidemia increases
cardiovascular risk more than twice for subjects with hypertension
confirming that risk factors interact with each other \[47, 48\].
According to previous studies analyzing LitHiR data, dyslipidemia was
present in 91.5% of patients with AH \[14\]. In our study, prevalence of
hypertension in the whole study population was 54.5% (55.8% of
dyslipidemic patients). Prevalence of dyslipidemia in Lithuania (89.7%)
is estimated to be higher than prevalence of hypertension while AH
remains the most common risk factor for both developed and still
developing countries worldwide \[49, 50\]. The impact of individual risk
factors is well established but evaluation of cardiovascular risk
requires assessment of multiple risk factors as clustering of CVD risk
factors leads to higher risk of developing cardiovascular events

Kutkiene et al. Lipids in Health and Disease (2018) 17:233

by having synergistic, rather than additive, effects on total risk \[3,
51, 52\]. According to study by Wu et al. percentage of subjects with
two or more cardiovascular risk factors varied from 36.0% in young men
to 67.4% in males aged 50--59 and from 6.5% in young women to 50.3% of
older (50-59y) females \[53\]. Frequency of multiple risk factors
increased with age in both men and women \[53\]. According to our data,
dyslipidemia was often accompanied by other cardiovascular risk factors
-- almost two thirds of middle-aged subjects with dyslipidemia had three
or more cardiovascular risk factors and only 7.5% had no other risk
factors. While typical high-risk profile of middle-aged Lithuanian has
been described as having dyslipidemia, hypertension and abdominal
obesity \[54\], it is clear that high cardiovascular risk in Lithuania
is impacted by combination of these different risk factors. Studies have
shown that greater number of risk factors is related to correspondingly
poorer clinical outcome \[55\]. Based on these revelations, it is clear
that optimal therapeutic CVD prevention strategy requires targeting 2 or
more of risk factors collectively \[46\]. Despite very high prevalence
of dyslipidemia, frequent coexistence of several cardiovascular risk
factors and high cardiovascular mortality in Lithuania, the average
estimated 10-year risk of fatal CVD disease based on the SCORE equation
in our study patients was moderate (1.87%). This finding was not
compatible with the EURIKA study results where average 10-year risk of
CVD death was 8.2% across Europe \[25\]. This revelation may propose
that high-risk SCORE equation could underestimate the risk in Lithuania
and other Eastern European countries with extremely high rates of CVD
mortality despite paper by Vikhireva et al. showing that high-risk SCORE
was a significant risk predictor in Lithuania and other Central and
Eastern European countries \[56\]. Other possible explanation could be
the SCORE index underestimating risk in patients with certain risk
factors not included in the equation, such as sedentary lifestyle,
visceral obesity, a family history of premature CVD, or presence of
subclinical atherosclerosis \[3, 25\]. This discovery could be the basis
of future studies examining potential reasons for the disparity between
calculated risk by SCORE equation and actual risk in our country. To
overcome the existing situation, it is essential to improve the control
of multiple risk factors, which have an important role in cardiovascular
pathology. There is good quality evidence of early and integrated
approach to correction of dyslipidemia and we need to raise awareness
about the benefit of timely detection and treatment of abnormal lipid
levels.

Limitations of the study The present study examined a sample of men aged
40-- 54 years and women aged 50--64 years. A future study is

Page 7 of 9

needed to examine the younger and the older samples. Some risk factors,
which are important in risk assessment, such as psychosocial factors,
social class and others, were not taken into account. Also, dyslipidemia
as defined in this study, cover broad spectrum of lipid abnormalities,
so very high prevalence of this disorder was detected. Further studies
are needed to evaluate prevalence of different types of dyslipidemia in
this population.

Conclusions Dyslipidemia is very common in middle-aged Lithuanians
without overt cardiovascular disease. Although prevalence of
cardiovascular risk factors increases with age, dyslipidemia is
associated with greater probability of having diabetes mellitus,
arterial hypertension, abdominal obesity, metabolic syndrome and
obesity, except for smoking, in all age groups compared to adults
without dyslipidemia. Men and women with dyslipidemia have a higher
total number of cardiovascular risk factors which synergistically
increases absolute risk of CVD. The average 10-year risk of CVD death in
patients with dyslipidemia was 1.95%. Our observations emphasize the
importance of properly diagnosing and treating dyslipidemia as well as
other concomitant risk factors in order to reduce burden of
cardiovascular disease in Lithuania. Funding This study is a part of the
ongoing LitHiR Primary Prevention Programme funded by the Statutory
Health Insurance Fund. Availability of data and materials The datasets
analysed during the current study are not publicly available as the
research is ongoing and further publications are being done. Authors'
contributions ZP, AL, PS and VK designed and directed the study. SK and
GM participated in collecting the data, while EP and AS performed the
analysis of the data. JS, UG and ES wrote the manuscript. MK and ER
rewieved the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. Ethics approval and consent to participate Local Research
Ethics Committee approval was obtained for this study. Consent for
publication Not applicable Competing interests The authors declare that
they have no competing interests.

Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Author details 1 Vilnius University, Faculty of Medicine, Clinic of
Cardiac and Vascular Diseases, Vilnius, Lithuania. 2Vilnius University,
Faculty of Medicine, Clinic of Internal Diseases, Family Medicine and
Oncology, Vilnius, Lithuania. 3Vilnius University, Faculty of Medicine,
Vilnius, Lithuania. 4Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos,
Santariskiu str. 2, 08661 Vilnius, Lithuania.

Kutkiene et al. Lipids in Health and Disease (2018) 17:233

Page 8 of 9

Received: 17 July 2018 Accepted: 1 October 2018 18. References 1. Causes
of death 2016. Health information Centre of the Institute of hygiene,
Vilnius; 2017. http://www.hi.lt/en/mortality-in-lithuania.html. 2.
Eurostat (2017). Causes of death -- standardized death rate, 2014
\[Datafile\]. Retrieved from:
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/
File:Causes_of_death\_---\_standardised_death_rate,\_2014\_(per_100_000\_
inhabitants)\_YB17.png 3. Piepoli MF, Hoes AW, Agewall S, et al. 2016
European Guidelines on cardiovascular disease prevention in clinical
practice: The Sixth Joint Task Force of the European Society of
Cardiology and Other Societies on Cardiovascular Disease Prevention in
Clinical Practice (constituted by representatives of 10 societies and by
invited experts): Developed with the special contribution of the
European Association for Cardiovascular Prevention & Rehabilitation
(EACPR). Eur Heart J. 2016. https://academic.oup.
com/eurheartj/article/37/29/2315/1748952 4. European Commission.
European Heart Health Charter. http://www.
heartcharter.org/download/toolkit/EHHC%20English.pdf. 5. Degoma EM,
Knowles JW, Angeli F, et al. The evolution and refinement of traditional
risk factors for cardiovascular disease. Cardiol Rev. 2012;20(3):118--
29 https://journals.lww.com/cardiologyinreview/Abstract/2012/05000/The\_
Evolution_and_Refinement_of_Traditional_Risk.4.aspx. 6. Nelson RH.
Hyperlipidemia as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Prim Care.
2013;40(1):195--211
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3572442/. 7. Baigent C,
Keech A, Kearney PM, et al. Efficacy and safety of cholesterollowering
treatment: prospective meta-analysis of data from 90,056 participants in
14 randomised trials of statins. Lancet. 2005;366(9493):1267--78
http://www.
thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(05)67394-1/fulltext.
8. Kabakci G, Koylan N, Ilerigelen B, et al. Impact of dyslipidemia on
cardiovascular risk stratification of hypertensive patients and
association of lipid profile with other cardiovascular risk factors:
results from the ICEBERG study. Integr Blood Press Control. 2008;1:5--13
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ pmc/articles/PMC3172055/. 9. Dalal JJ,
Padmanabhan TN, Jain P, et al. LIPITENSION: interplay between
dyslipidemia and hypertension. Indian J Endocrinol Metab.
2012;16(2):240--5 http://www.ijem.in/text.asp?2012/16/2/240/93742. 10.
Granger DN, Rodrigues SF, Yildirim A, et al. Microvascular responses to
cardiovascular risk factors. Microcirculation. 2010;17(3):192--205
https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1549-8719.2009.00015.x. 11.
Rinkūnienė E, Laucevičius A, Petrulionienė Ž, et al. Lietuvos didelės
kardiovaskulinės rizikos pacientų atrankos ir prevencinių premonių
(LitHiR) programos rezultatai: dislipidemijos paplitimas tarp vidurinio
amžiaus suaugusių Lietuvos gyventojų. Medicinos teorija ir praktika.
2012;18(4.2):636-- 42 http://www.mtp.lt/files/MTP4.2_21_636--642p.pdf.
12. Catapano AL, Graham I, De backer G, et al. 2016 ESC/EAS Guidelines
for the Management of Dyslipidaemias: The Task Force for the Management
of Dyslipidaemias of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and
European Atherosclerosis Society (EAS)Developed with the special
contribution of the European Assocciation for Cardiovascular Prevention
& Rehabilitation (EACPR). Eur Heart J. 2016.
http://www.atherosclerosis-journal.com/article/
S0021-9150(16)31267-9/fulltext 13. Dambrauskiene K, Veryga A, Klumbiene
J, et al. Evaluation of smoking habits among Lithuanian adult population
in 1994-2008, according to gender, age and education. Public Health.
2010;1:31--5 http://www.hi.lt/uploads/pdf/
visuomenes%20sveikata/2010.1(48)/SV_Dambrausk.pdf. 14. Rinkūnienė E,
Petrulionienė Ž, Dženkevičiūtė V, et al. Tradicinių rizikos veiksnių
paplitimas tarp pacientų, sergančių arterine hipertenzija. Medicinos
teorija ir praktika. 2013;T19(Nr. 2):124--9
http://www.mtp.lt/files/MTP2-4str124-129psl.pdf. 15. Executive Summary
of The Third Report of The National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP)
Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, And Treatment of High Blood
Cholesterol In Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III). JAMA. 2001; 285:
2486--2497.
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/articleabstract/193847?redirect=true
16. Conroy RM, Pyörälä K, Fitzgerald AP, et al. Estimation of ten-year
risk of fatal cardiovascular disease in Europe: the SCORE project. Eur
Heart J. 2003;24: 987--1003.
https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/24/11/987/427645. 17.
Laucevicius A, Kasiulevicius V, Jatuzis D, et al. Lithuanian high
cardiovascular risk (LitHiR) primary prevention programme - rationale
and design. Seminars

19\.

20\.

21\.

22\.

23\.

24\.

25\.

26\.

27\.

28\.

29\.

30\.

31\.

32\.

33\.

34\.

in Cardiovascular Medicine. 2012;18:3 https://www.degruyter.com/view/j/
semcard.2012.18.issue-1/v10287-012-0003-3/v10287-012-0003-3.xml.
Lewington S, Whitlock G, Clarke R, et al. Blood cholesterol and vascular
mortality by age, sex, and blood pressure: a meta-analysis of individual
data from 61 prospective studies with 55,000 vascular deaths. Lancet.
2007; 370(9602):1829--39
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/
PIIS0140-6736(07)61778-4/fulltext. Pastor-barriuso R, Banegas JR, Damián
J, et al. Systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, and pulse
pressure: an evaluation of their joint effect on mortality. Ann Intern
Med. 2003;139(9):731--9 http://annals.org/
aim/article-abstract/716894/systolic-blood-pressure-diastolic-blood-pressurepulse-pressure-evaluation-joint?volume=139&issue=9&page=731.
Doll R, Peto R, Boreham J, et al. Mortality in relation to smoking: 50
years' observations on male British doctors. BMJ. 2004;328(7455):1519
https:// www.bmj.com/content/328/7455/1519. Sarwar N, Gao P, Seshasai
SR, et al. Diabetes mellitus, fasting blood glucose concentration, and
risk of vascular disease: a collaborative meta-analysis of 102
prospective studies. Lancet. 2010;375(9733):2215--22 http://www.
thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(10)60484-9/fulltext.
Ettehad D, Emdin CA, Kiran A, et al. Blood pressure lowering for
prevention of cardiovascular disease and death: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Lancet. 2016;387(10022):957--67
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/
article/PIIS0140-6736(15)01225-8/fulltext. Pirie K, Peto R, Reeves GK,
et al. The 21st century hazards of smoking and benefits of stopping: a
prospective study of one million women in the UK. Lancet.
2013;381(9861):133--41 http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/
article/PIIS0140-6736(12)61720-6/fulltext. Vasan RS, Sullivan LM, Wilson
PWF, et al. Relative importance of borderline and elevated levels of
coronary heart disease risk factors. Ann Intern Med. 2005;142:393--41
http://annals.org/aim/fullarticle/718264/relativeimportance-borderline-elevated-levels-coronary-heart-disease-risk-factors.
Guallar E, Banegas JR, Blasco-Colmenares E, et al. Excess risk
attributable to traditional cardiovascular risk factors in clinical
practice settings across Europe - the EURIKA study. BMC Public Health.
2011;11:704 https://www. ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184074/. Pan
L, Yang Z, Wu Y, et al. The prevalence, awareness, treatment and control
of dyslipidemia among adults in China. Atherosclerosis. 2016;248: 2--9
http://www.atherosclerosis-journal.com/article/S0021-9150(16)300466/fulltext.
Huang Y, Gao L, Xie X, et al. Epidemiology of dyslipidemia in Chinese
adults: meta-analysis of prevalence, awareness, treatment, and control.
Popul Health Metr. 2014;12(1):28
https://pophealthmetrics.biomedcentral.com/
articles/10.1186/s12963-014-0028-7. Tóth PP, Potter D, Ming EE.
Prevalence of lipid abnormalities in the United States: the National
Health and nutrition examination survey 2003-2006. J Clin Lipidol.
2012;6(4):325--30
http://www.lipidjournal.com/article/S19332874(12)00219-X/fulltext.
Steinhagen-Thiessen E, Bramlage P, Lösch C, et al. Dyslipidemia in
primary care\--prevalence, recognition, treatment and control: data from
the German metabolic and cardiovascular risk project (GEMCAS).
Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2008; 7:31
https://cardiab.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1475-2840-7-31. Joshi
SR, Anjana RM, Deepa M, et al. Prevalence of dyslipidemia in urban and
rural India: the ICMR-INDIAB study. PLoS One. 2014;9(5):e96808 http://
journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0096808.
Grabauskas VJ, Klumbienė J, Petkevičienė J, et al. Risk factors for
noncommunicable diseases in Lithuanian rural population: CINDI survey
2007. Medicina. 2008;44:633--9
https://publications.lsmuni.lt/object/elaba: 5215890/. Domarkienė S,
Tamošiūnas A, Rėklaitienė R, et al. Trends in main cardiovascular risk
factors among middle-aged Kaunas population between 1983 and 2002.
Medicina. 2003;39:1193--9 http://medicina.lsmuni.lt/med/
0312/0312-08e.pdf. Yusuf S, Hawken S, Ounpuu S, et al. Effect of
potentially modifiable risk factors associated with myocardial
infarction in 52 countries (the INTERHEART study): case-control study.
Lancet. 2004;364(9438):937--52
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(04)170189/fulltext.
Lee MH, Ahn SV, Hur NW, et al. Gender differences in the association
between smoking and dyslipidemia: 2005 Korean National Health and
nutrition examination survey. Clin Chim Acta. 2011;412(17--18):1600--5
https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0009898111002695?via%3Dihub.

Kutkiene et al. Lipids in Health and Disease (2018) 17:233

35\. Mouhamed HD, Ezzaher A. Ne Ati F, et al. association between
cigarette smoking and dyslipidemia. IBS. 2013;28(4):195--200
http://www.em-consulte.
com/article/836443/association-between-cigarette-smoking-and-dyslipid.
36. Schuitemaker GE, Dinant GJ, van der Pol GA, et al. Relationship
between smoking habits and low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol,
high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol, and triglycerides in a
hypercholesterolemic adult cohort, in relation to gender and age. Clin
Exp Med. 2002;2:83--8 https:// www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12141531. 37.
Kuzuya M, Ando R, Iguchi A, et al. Effect of smoking habit on
age-related changes in serum lipids: a cross-sectional and longitudinal
analysis in a large Japanese cohort. Atherosclerosis. 2006;185:183--90
http://www.
atherosclerosis-journal.com/article/S0021-9150(05)00370-9/fulltext. 38.
Tan XJ, Jiao GP, Ren YJ, et al. Relationship between smoking and
dyslipidemia in western Chinese elderly males. J Clin Lab Anal.
2008;22(3): 159--63
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/jcla.20235. 39. Wyatt
SB, Winters KP, Dubbert PM. Overweight and obesity: prevalence,
consequences, and causes of a growing public health problem. Am J Med
Sci. 2006;331(4):166--74
http://www.amjmedsci.org/article/S00029629(15)32803-2/fulltext. 40.
Nahar N, Dubey S, Joshi A, et al. Association of anthropometric indices
of obesity with diabetes, hypertension and dyslipidemia: a study from
Central India. Indian J of Medical Specialities. 2012;3(1):6--11
http://web.b.ebscohost.
com/ehost/detail/detail?vid=0&sid=b2018092-6ba3-44e0-9e37912bf71935af%40pdc-v-sessmgr01&bdata=
JnNpdGU9ZWhvc3QtbGl2ZQ%3d%3d#AN=79187528&db=a9h. 41. Onat A, Ayhan E,
Hergenc G, et al. Smoking inhibits visceral fat accumulation in Turkish
women: relation of visceral fat and body fat mass to atherogenic
dyslipidemia, inflammatory markers, insulin resistance, and blood
pressure. Metabolism. 2009;58(7):963--70 http://www.
metabolismjournal.com/article/S0026-0495(09)00092-4/fulltext. 42.
Paccaud F, Schlüter-Fasmeyer V, Wietlisbach V, et al. Dyslipidemia and
abdominal obesity: an assessment in three general populations. J Clin
Epidemiol. 2000;53(4):393--400
http://www.jclinepi.com/article/S08954356(99)00184-5/fulltext. 43.
Nguyen NT, Magno CP, Lane KT, et al. Association of hypertension,
diabetes, dyslipidemia, and metabolic syndrome with obesity: findings
from the National Health and nutrition examination survey, 1999 to 2004.
J Am Coll Surg. 2008;207(6):928--34
http://www.journalacs.org/article/S10727515(08)01322-7/fulltext. 44.
Taskinen MR, Boren J. New insights into the pathophysiology of
dyslipidemia in type 2 diabetes. Atherosclerosis. 2015;239(2):483--95
http://
www.atherosclerosis-journal.com/article/S0021-9150(15)00088-X/fulltext.
45. Wu L, Parhofer KG. Diabetic dyslipidemia. Metabolism.
2014;63(12):1469--79
http://www.metabolismjournal.com/article/S0026-0495(14)00258-3/fulltext.
46. Chapman MJ, Sposito AC. Hypertension and dyslipidaemia in obesity
and insulin resistance: pathophysiology, impact on atherosclerotic
disease and pharmacotherapy. Pharmacol Ther. 2008;117(3):354--73
https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S016372580700232X?via%3Dihub. 47.
Wong ND, Lopez V, Tang S, et al. Prevalence, treatment, and control of
combined hypertension and hypercholesterolemia in the United States. Am
J Cardiol. 2006;98(2):204--8
http://www.ajconline.org/article/S00029149(06)00671-0/fulltext. 48.
Jackson R, Lawes CM, Bennett DA, et al. Treatment with drugs to lower
blood pressure and blood cholesterol based on an individual\'s absolute
cardiovascular risk. Lancet. 2005;365(9457):434--41
http://www.thelancet.
com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(05)17833-7/fulltext. 49.
Kearney PM, Whelton M, Reynolds K, et al. Worldwide prevalence of
hypertension: a systematic review. J Hypertens. 2004;22:9--11 https://
journals.lww.com/jhypertension/pages/articleviewer.aspx?year=2004&issue=
01000&article=00003&type=abstract. 50. Kotseva K, Wood D, De backer G,
et al. EUROASPIRE III: a survey on the lifestyle, risk factors and use
of cardioprotective drug therapies in coronary patients from 22 European
countries. Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil. 2009; 16(2):121--37
http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1097/HJR. 0b013e3283294b1d. 51.
Poulter N. Coronary heart disease is a multifactorial disease. Am J
Hypertens. 1999;12(10 Pt 2):92S--5S
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10555607. 52. Zannad F, Jakobsen A,
Heroys J, et al. Cardiovascular high-risk patients -- treat to protect,
but whom?. Medscape J Med. 2008;10 Suppl:S2. https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2344116/

Page 9 of 9

53\. Wu DM, Pai L, Chu NF, et al. Prevalence and clustering of
cardiovascular risk factors among healthy adults in a Chinese
population: the MJ health screening center study in Taiwan. Int J Obes
Relat Metab Disord. 2001;25(8): 1189--95.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11477504. 54. Laucevičius A,
Rinkūnienė E, Skorniakov V, et al. High-risk profile in a region with
extremely elevated cardiovascular mortality. Hell J Cardiol. 2013;54(6):
441--7 https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/e0ad/
d175fc5ed60e86af702e93fd0d8167ad1b21.pdf. 55. Thomas F, Rudnichi A,
Bacri AM, et al. Cardiovascular mortality in hypertensive men according
to presence of associated risk factors. Hypertension. 2001;37(5):
1256--61 http://hyper.ahajournals.org/content/37/5/1256.long. 56.
Vikhireva O, Pajak A, Broda G, et al. SCORE performance in central and
Eastern Europe and former Soviet Union: MONICA and HAPIEE results. Eur
Heart J. 2014;35(9):571--7
https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/35/9/571/531043.

JNCI J Natl Cancer Inst (2021) 113(9): djab041 doi:
10.1093/jnci/djab041 First published online March 18, 2021 Article

Long-Term Colorectal Cancer Incidence and Mortality After Colonoscopy
Screening According to Individuals' Risk Profiles , MD, ScD,2,3 Kana Wu,
MD, PhD,1,4,5 Shuji Ogino

Edward L. Giovannucci, MD, ScD,1,4,5 Andrew T. Chan

, MD, PhD,1,6,7,8

, MD, MPH,2,3,5,8,9 Mingyang Song

, MD, ScD1,2,3,4,\*

1 Department of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health,
Boston, MA, USA; 2Clinical and Translational Epidemiology Unit,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
USA; 3Division of Gastroenterology, Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; 4 Department of Nutrition,
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA; 5Channing
Division of Network Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA;
6Department of Oncologic Pathology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; 7Program in MPE Molecular
Pathological Epidemiology, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; 8Broad Institute
of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA and 9Department of Immunology and
Infectious Diseases, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston,
MA, USA

\*Correspondence to: Mingyang Song, MD, ScD, Department of Epidemiology,
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, 667 Huntington Ave, Kresge
906A, Boston, MA 02115, USA (e-mail: mingyangsong@mail.harvard.edu).

Abstract Background: It remains unknown whether the benefit of
colonoscopy screening against colorectal cancer (CRC) and the optimal
age to start screening differ by CRC risk profile. Methods: Among 75 873
women and 42 875 men, we defined a CRC risk score (0-8) based on family
history, aspirin, height, body mass index, smoking, physical activity,
alcohol, and diet. We calculated colonoscopy screening-associated hazard
ratios and absolute risk reductions (ARRs) for CRC incidence and
mortality and age-specific CRC cumulative incidence according to risk
score. All statistical tests were 2-sided. Results: During a median of
26 years of follow-up, we documented 2407 CRC cases and 874 CRC deaths.
Although the screening-associated hazard ratio did not vary by risk
score, the ARRs in multivariable-adjusted 10-year CRC incidence more
than doubled for individuals with scores 6-8 (ARR ¼ 0.34%, 95%
confidence interval \[CI\] ¼ 0.26% to 0.42%) compared with 0-2 (ARR ¼
0.15%, 95% CI ¼ 0.12% to 0.18%, Ptrend \< .001). Similar results were
found for CRC mortality (ARR ¼ 0.22%, 95% CI ¼ 0.21% to 0.24% vs 0.08%,
95% CI ¼ 0.07% to 0.08%, Ptrend \< .001). The ARR in mortality of distal
colon and rectal cancers was fourfold higher for scores 68 than 0-2
(distal colon cancer: ARR ¼ 0.08%, 95% CI ¼ 0.07% to 0.08% vs 0.02%, 95%
CI ¼ 0.02% to 0.02%, Ptrend \< .001; rectal cancer: ARR ¼ 0.08%, 95% CI
¼ 0.08% to 0.09% vs 0.02%, 95% CI ¼ 0.02% to 0.03%, Ptrend \< .001).
When using age 45 years as the benchmark to start screening, individuals
with risk scores of 0-2, 3, 4, 5, and 6-8 attained the threshold CRC
risk level (10-year cumulative risk of 0.47%) at age 51 years, 48 years,
45 years, 42 years, and 38 years, respectively. Conclusions: The
absolute benefit of colonoscopy screening is more than twice higher for
individuals with the highest than lowest CRC risk profile. Individuals
with a high- and low-risk profile may start screening up to 6-7 years
earlier and later, respectively, than the recommended age of 45 years.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third-leading cause of cancer death in
the United States (1). Screening has been shown to decrease CRC
incidence and mortality by identifying and removing precancerous polyps
and early cancers (2-14). Among the available screening options (9,10),
colonoscopy is most widely used in the United States (15). Despite an
overall increase in the uptake of CRC screening, there remains a
substantial disparity in the uptake (16-19) and approximately 40%
screening-eligible adult Americans not complying with the
recommendations (20,21). These data highlight the importance of tailored

screening recommendations based on risk profile to optimize the benefit
of screening and resource allocation at the population level. Currently,
CRC screening is recommended based only on age and family history.
Although several studies have examined CRC risk prediction based on
clinical, lifestyle, environmental, and genetic factors, those studies
either aimed to develop screening recommendations based on the predicted
CRC risk (22-26) or examined the joint effect of predictors and
screening on CRC risk (27). To the best of our knowledge, no prior study

Received: October 26, 2020; Revised: December 28, 2020; Accepted:
February 11, 2021 © The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University
Press. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com

1177

ARTICLE

, MD, PhD,1 Wenjie Ma

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article/113/9/1177/6178004
by guest on 11 March 2024

Kai Wang

1178 \| JNCI J Natl Cancer Inst, 2021, Vol. 113, No. 9

Methods Detailed information about the study methods is provided in the
Supplementary Methods (available online).

Assessment of CRC Risk Profile We selected the CRC risk factors
constituting the risk profile based on the established evidence for
their role in CRC. In detail, we included 8 prevalent risk factors in
the general adult population, including first-degree relatives with CRC
(34,35), cigarette smoking (36-38), body mass index (BMI) (39,40),
physical activity (41,42), alcohol consumption (43,44), aspirin use
(45-47), height (48,49), and diet (50-53). Alcohol consumption and diet
were assessed every 4 years using validated food-frequency
questionnaires (54,55) and the other factors through biennial
questionnaires. Diet quality was assessed with the 6 major dietary
recommendations in the World Cancer Research Fund/ American Institute
for Cancer Research Third Expert Report released in 2018 (53). For each
of the 8 factors, we defined a highrisk criterion, by which the
participants received a risk score of 1 if they met the criterion and 0
otherwise (Supplementary Table 1, available online). An overall CRC risk
score (range ¼ 0-8) was then defined as the sum of the 8 scores, with a
higher score indicating a higher CRC risk.

Ascertainment of Cases and Deaths of CRC Participants reported CRC
diagnoses on each biennial questionnaire. CRC deaths were identified
through the National Death Index or report by family members (56). For
the reported CRC cases or deaths, we obtained medical records to confirm
the diagnosis or cause of death by study physicians.

Statistical Analysis Study Population

ARTICLE

The NHS and HPFS are 2 ongoing US cohorts that included 121 700
registered female nurses aged 30-55 years at enrollment in 1976 and 51
529 male health professionals aged 40-75 years at enrollment in 1986,
respectively (32,33). In both cohorts, participants completed a detailed
biennial questionnaire regarding lifestyle and medical history, and
health-related questions with over 90% of follow-up. In the current
study, we defined baseline as the year 1988, for both the NHS and HPFS,
when we started to collect detailed information of colonoscopy. We
excluded participants with a baseline history of cancer (except
nonmelanoma skin cancer), inflammatory bowel disease, and those with
missing information on diet and major lifestyle factors (Supplementary
Figure 1, available online). As a result, 75 873 women and 42 875 men
were included in the analysis. The study protocol was approved by the
institutional review board of the Brigham and Women's Hospital and
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health and by those of participating
registries as required.

Assessment of Colonoscopy Screening In both cohorts, beginning in 1988
and continuing through 2014, participants were asked biennially whether
they had undergone a colonoscopy in the past 2 years and, if so, the
reason for the colonoscopy. We defined a colonoscopy screening as those
for routine, age-related CRC screening or because of a family history of
CRC, but not for positive symptoms. Participants were considered
unscreened until the first time when they reported undertaking a
colonoscopy screening and were considered screened thereafter for the
remainder of follow-up.

Data were analyzed from February 26, 2020, to June 20, 2020.
Participants contributed person-time from return of the baseline
questionnaire (1988) until the date of CRC diagnosis (for CRC incidence
analysis only), death, loss to follow-up, or end of the follow-up period
(June 30, 2014, for the NHS and January 31, 2014, for the HPFS),
whichever came first. First, we used timevarying and age-, questionnaire
cycle--, and cohort-stratified Cox proportional hazards regression
models to estimate the multivariable hazard ratios and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) for the association of colonoscopy screening with CRC
incidence and mortality according to CRC risk score. We tested the trend
in the hazard ratios across CRC risk scores by including in the model
the main effects of CRC risk score (continuous) and colonoscopy
screening (binary) as well as their product term, whose P value was
considered as the Ptrend. Second, to examine the absolute benefit of
colonoscopy screening according to CRC risk score, we assessed the
multivariable-adjusted cumulative incidence and mortality of CRC
according to the CRC risk score and colonoscopy screening status at
baseline using Cox regression models. We calculated the cumulative risks
of 10, 20, and throughout the follow-up of up to 28 years separately. In
each CRC risk score group, we calculated the absolute risk reductions
(ARRs) associated with colonoscopy screening by subtracting the
cumulative risk in the screening group from that in the nonscreening
group. We assessed the trend in the ARRs across CRC risk scores by
regressing the multivariable-adjusted 10-year cumulative risk on
baseline colonoscopy screening status and CRC risk score as well as
their product term. The P value of the product term was derived as the
Ptrend in the ARRs across CRC risk scores. Then, to estimate the
risk-adapted starting age of screening, we calculated the age-specific
multivariable-adjusted 10-, 20-,

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article/113/9/1177/6178004
by guest on 11 March 2024

has directly examined whether the benefit of screening differs by risk
profile. The optimal age to start screening is a critical component of
screening recommendations. Since 2002, the US Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) recommended CRC screening to start at age 50 years in
average-risk adults. Given the increasing incidence of early-onset CRC
in recent years (28), in 2020, the USPSTF released the draft
recommendation that average-risk adults may initiate routine screening
at age 45 years instead of 50 years (29). A similar recommendation has
been made by the American Cancer Society (30). These recommendations for
earlier screening have spurred intensive debate about the riskbenefit
balance and led to greater interest in developing riskbased screening
strategies (22,31). Therefore, in the current study, we prospectively
assessed the relative and absolute risk of CRC incidence and mortality
associated with colonoscopy screening according to individuals' risk
profiles within 2 large cohorts in the United States, including the
Nurses' Health Study (NHS) and Health Professionals Follow-up Study
(HPFS). We also examined the age-specific CRC cumulative incidence and
identified the ages when the threshold CRC risk at age 45 years and 50
years, respectively, was attained among individuals with different CRC
risk profiles.

K. Wang et al. \| 1179

Results

Discussion In 2 large prospective cohorts, we found that, although
colonoscopy screening was associated with a similar relative risk of CRC
among individuals with different risk profiles, the absolute benefit of
colonoscopy screening was more than twice higher for individuals with
the highest CRC risk score compared with the lowest score. We also
observed that individuals with a high or low CRC risk profile may start
colonoscopy screening for up to 6-7 years earlier and later,
respectively, than the recommended age of 45 years or 50 years. These
findings provide evidence for the development of tailored colonoscopy
screening recommendations based on individuals' risk profiles. A number
of prior studies have assessed the benefit of colonoscopy screening
(2-14,58) and developed risk prediction models for CRC (22-26,59).
However, no prior studies have examined how the benefit of colonoscopy
screening may be modified by CRC risk profile. In a recent study
focusing on the additional benefit of a healthy lifestyle on top of a
predefined genetic risk and colonoscopy status (27), as a secondary
finding, the authors observed a consistent CRC risk reduction by
colonoscopy across all groups jointly defined by genetic risk and
healthy lifestyle status. However, that study did not examine how
colonoscopyrelated CRC risk reduction might be modified by individuals'
CRC risk profile. Addressing this question has the potential to inform
risk-based screening recommendations through a direct assessment of the
benefit of screening against CRC rather than via implications for the
intent to screen in the risk prediction models. Given that risk
stratification may enable a more efficient use of limited colonoscopy
resources (60), our study has important implications for tailored CRC
screening. Colonoscopy screening protects against incident CRC through
detection and removal of colorectal precancerous lesions, whereas the
factors constituting our CRC risk score, that is, family history of CRC,
aspirin use, height, weight, BMI, smoking, alcohol use, physical
activity, and diet, influence CRC risk through various biological
pathways, including genetic susceptibility, hyperinsulinemia, systemic
inflammation, and modulation of gene expression and the gut microbiota
(34,48,51,6164). Due to the largely independent pathways through which

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article/113/9/1177/6178004
by guest on 11 March 2024

Mean age at baseline was 54 years (SD ¼ 8). In the 2 cohorts of 118 748
participants with a median of 26 years (up to 28 years and 2 388 051
person-years) of follow-up, we documented 2407 incident CRC cases and
874 CRC deaths, among which 1039 cases (43.2%) and 258 deaths (29.5%)
occurred in the first 10 years, and 1729 cases (71.8%) and 745 deaths
(85.2%) occurred in the first 20 years. By subsite, 910 cases (37.8%)
and 304 deaths (34.8%) were of proximal colon cancer, 633 cases (26.3%)
and 208 deaths (23.8%) of distal colon cancer, and 514 cases (21.4%) and
180 deaths (20.6%) of rectal cancer, with the remaining (14.5% cases and
20.8% deaths) having no confirmed subsite information. Throughout the
follow-up, 57.0% of the participants reported a history of colonoscopy
screening. As shown in Table 1, based on person-years, the prevalence of
the CRC risk score of 0-2, 3, 4, 5, and 6-8 was 13.9%, 22.6%, 29.6%,
22.6%, and 11.3%, respectively; within each risk score group, the
prevalence of colonoscopy screening was 22.7% to 31.3%. Compared with
the score of 0-2, those with the score of 3, 4, 5, and 6-8 had 19.1%,
50.8%, 77.3%, and 145.2% higher risk of CRC, respectively (Supplementary
Table 1, available online). Table 2 shows the association of colonoscopy
screening with CRC incidence and mortality according to CRC risk score.
For CRC incidence, colonoscopy screening was associated with a hazard
ratio of 0.59 (95% CI ¼ 0.42 to 0.83), 0.56 (95% CI ¼ 0.42 to 0.73),
0.50 (95% CI ¼ 0.40 to 0.63), 0.55 (95% CI ¼ 0.44 to 0.70), and 0.58
(95% CI ¼ 0.44 to 0.76) among individuals with a CRC risk score of 0-2,
3, 4, 5, and 6-8, respectively (Ptrend ¼ .68). Similar results were
observed for CRC mortality (Ptrend ¼ .71) and subsite-specific CRC
(Ptrend  .17) in individuals without and with family history of CRC
separately, respectively, and when individuals were classified according
to each of the 8 factors individually (Supplementary Tables 2-4,
available online). We then examined the 10- and 28-year
multivariableadjusted cumulative CRC incidence and mortality by
screening status and calculated the ARRs associated with colonoscopy
screening according to CRC risk score. As shown in Figure 1, the ARR
associated with screening increased with the risk score (02: 0.15%, 95%
CI ¼ 0.12% to 0.18%; 3: 0.22%, 95% CI ¼ 0.19% to 0.25%; 4: 0.23%, 95% CI
¼ 0.20% to 0.26%; 5: 0.29%, 95% CI ¼ 0.25% to 0.33%; 6-8: 0.34%, 95% CI
¼ 0.26% to 0.42%; Ptrend \< .001). For mortality, the corresponding ARR
increased from 0.08% (95% CI ¼ 0.07% to 0.08%) with a score of 0-2 to
0.22% (95% CI ¼ 0.21% to 0.24%) with a score of 6-8 (Ptrend \< .001).
When assessed by CRC subsites, for cancer mortality of proximal colon,
distal colon, and rectum, the ARRs increased from 0.01% (95% CI ¼ 0.01%
to 0.02%) to 0.03% (95% CI ¼ 0.02% to 0.03%), from 0.02% (95% CI ¼ 0.02%
to 0.02%) to 0.08% (95% CI ¼ 0.07% to 0.08%), and from 0.02% (95% CI ¼
0.02% to 0.03%) to 0.08% (95% CI ¼ 0.08% to 0.09%), respectively (all
Ptrend \< .001) (Figure 2). Similar results were found for incidence by
CRC subsites (Supplementary

Figure 2, available online), when person-years were excluded when a
symptomatic colonoscopy was reported (Supplementary Figure 3, available
online) and when we used the 28-year cumulative CRC incidence and
mortality (Supplementary Figure 4, available online). Finally, we
plotted the age-specific multivariable-adjusted 10-, 20-, and 28-year
cumulative incidence of CRC in the overall cohorts and in each of the
risk score groups. We observed a cumulative incidence of 0.47% in the
overall cohorts at the benchmark age of 45 years (Figure 3). This
threshold risk level was attained at age 51 years, 48 years, 45 years,
42 years, and 38 years for individuals with the CRC risk score of 0-2,
3, 4, 5, and 6-8, respectively. When we used age 50 years as the
benchmark, the cumulative incidence was 0.68% and corresponding ages
were 56 years, 53 years, 51 years, 48 years, and 44 years. Similar
results were observed in individuals without and with a family history
of CRC separately (Supplementary Figure 5, available online), in men and
women separately (Supplementary Figure 6, available online), and when we
used the 20- and 28year cumulative incidence of CRC (1.62% and 2.51%,
respectively, in the overall cohorts) to plot the curves (Supplementary
Figure 7, available online).

ARTICLE

and 28-year cumulative incidence of CRC in the overall cohorts and each
risk score group that was defined at baseline. Riskadapted starting age
of screening was defined as the age at which individuals with a
particular CRC risk score at baseline attained the threshold level of
CRC cumulative incidence at which the general population is usually
advised to initiate screening (57). The analyses were conducted using
SAS version 9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). All statistical tests were
2-sided, and P values less than .05 were considered statistically
significant.

ARTICLE No screening

62.0 37.4 94.1 3.3 53.6 53.0 65.7 23.5 1.9 14.6 4.8 39.4 3.0 1.3 155.6
16.5 200.8 0.3 60.3

71.9 61.6 94.3 8.0

59.7 63.5 66.0 23.7 1.1 11.1 5.6 41.2

2.8 1.1 160.1 15.6 221.6 0.4

68.2

No screening

No screening

706 919 (29.6)

Screening

61.4

3.7 1.6 141.6 15.8 179.9 0.3

41.8 55.4 66.2 24.8 2.0 16.2 5.9 29.1

71.7 58.5 95.4 15.2

48.9

3.9 1.9 137.1 16.3 157.1 0.3

37.1 46.0 65.9 24.8 5.2 20.4 5.4 26.1

61.7 32.3 94.7 6.3

55.8

4.0 2.0 132.3 15.9 159.3 0.3

30.5 53.2 66.6 26.0 3.8 19.3 6.8 21.0

71.6 56.0 96.2 25.0

41.2

4.4 2.3 127.8 16.0 133.7 0.3

24.6 41.3 66.2 26.2 9.6 24.5 6.3 18.4

61.7 29.8 95.5 10.4

138 610 (25.7) 401 014 (74.3) 164 882 (23.3) 542 037 (76.7)

539 624 (22.6)

Screening

4

122 569 (22.7)

50.8

4.2 2.2 127.1 15.9 142.3 0.3

19.8 52.6 67.2 27.0 7.7 23.1 9.2 17.0

71.5 54.4 96.2 35.8

No screening

No screening

6-8

63 476 (23.4) 71.3 52.5 97.3 55.7 10.3 50.2 68.0 27.9 10.8 26.0 13.9
13.1 4.5 2.5 122.2 15.7 134.0 0.3 44.4

61.8 29.3 96.2 18.0 14.9 37.9 66.9 27.2 15.7 28.3 8.8 13.9 4.6 2.5 121.7
16.0 119.8 0.2 36.6

33.4

4.8 2.8 115.7 16.1 107.2 0.2

6.5 35.0 67.9 27.9 22.5 31.3 15.0 11.0

62.0 29.8 96.8 35.8

207 786 (76.6)

271 261 (11.3)

Screening

416 811 (77.3)

539 380 (22.6)

Screening

5

Updated information throughout follow-up was used to calculate the means
for continuous variables and percentage for categorical variables. All
variables were age- and sex-standardized except person-years, age, and
sex; age

227 221 (68.7)

103 645 (31.3)

330 867 (13.9)

Screening

3

c

Among ever-smokers only.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article/113/9/1177/6178004
by guest on 11 March 2024

Report 2018, which included red meat \<0.5 serving per day, processed
meat \<0.2 serving per day, dietary fiber 30 g/d, dairy products 3
servings per day, whole grains 48 g/d or account for at least one-half
of total grains, and calcium supplement use).

intake (1 drink \[14 g alcohol\] per day for women and 2 drinks per
day for men), and unhealthy diet (meeting \<3 of the 6 dietary
recommendations by the World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for
Cancer Research

of height in each cohort), overweight or obesity (body mass index 25.0
kg/m2), current smoker or past smoker with 5 or more pack-years, low
physical activity (\<30 min/d of moderate-to-vigorous intensity
activity), heavy alcohol

and sex were mutually standardized. CRC ¼ colorectal cancer. b CRC risk
score (range ¼ 0-8) was defined as the number of the 8 CRC high-risk
factors: having a family history of CRC among the first-degree
relatives, no regular use of aspirin (\<2 tablets or times per week),
tall stature (upper 50%

a

Person-years (% in overall study sample) Person-years (% within risk
score group) Age, y Male sex, % White race, % Family history of CRC in
firstdegree relatives, % Regular aspirin use, % Current multivitamin
use, % Height, inches Body mass index, kg/m2 Current smoker, %
Pack-years of smokingc Alcohol intake, g/d Physical activity, min/d
Dietary intake Red meat, serving/wk Processed meat, serving/wk Dietary
fiber, g/wk Dairy products, serving/wk Whole grain, g/wk Ratio of whole
grains/total grains in weight Calcium supplement, %

Characteristic

0-2

CRC risk score

Table 1. Age- and sex-standardized characteristicsa of study
participants according to CRC risk scoreb and colonoscopy screening
status

1180 \| JNCI J Natl Cancer Inst, 2021, Vol. 113, No. 9

K. Wang et al. \| 1181

Table 2. Association of colonoscopy screening with incidence and
mortality of CRC according to CRC risk scorea CRC risk score 3

4

5

6-8

58 167

79 333

111 579

105 525

80 370

56 74 0.58 (0.41 to 0.81) 0.59 (0.42 to 0.83) 0.59 (0.42 to 0.83)

57 83 0.56 (0.43 to 0.74) 0.58 (0.44 to 0.76) 0.56 (0.42 to 0.73)

67 107 0.50 (0.40 to 0.62) 0.51 (0.41 to 0.64) 0.50 (0.40 to 0.63)

86 126 0.55 (0.44 to 0.69) 0.57 (0.45 to 0.71) 0.55 (0.44 to 0.70)

126 178 0.60 (0.46 to 0.78) 0.60 (0.46 to 0.78) 0.58 (0.44 to 0.76)

15 41

25 94

35 221

49 209

29 156

18 22 0.44 (0.23 to 0.86) 0.52 (0.26 to 1.01) 0.50 (0.25 to 0.98)

19 26 0.42 (0.26 to 0.68) 0.52 (0.32 to 0.85) 0.52 (0.32 to 0.85)

20 40 0.25 (0.17 to 0.37) 0.29 (0.20 to 0.43) 0.29 (0.20 to 0.42)

35 45 0.44 (0.32 to 0.62) 0.51 (0.37 to 0.72) 0.52 (0.37 to 0.73)

37 61 0.35 (0.23 to 0.53) 0.41 (0.27 to 0.63) 0.41 (0.27 to 0.64)

Ptrendf

.57 .64 .68

.66 .68 .71

a

CRC risk score (range ¼ 0-8) was defined as the number of the 8 CRC-high
risk factors: having a family history of CRC among the first-degree
relatives, no regular use

of aspirin (\<2 tablets or times per week), tall stature (upper 50% of
height in each cohort), overweight or obesity (body mass index 25.0
kg/m2), current smoker or past smoker with 5 or more pack-years, low
physical activity (\<30 min/d of moderate-to-vigorous intensity
activity), heavy alcohol intake (1 drink \[14 g alcohol\] per day for
women and 2 drinks per day for men), and unhealthy diet (meeting \<3 of
the 6 dietary recommendations by the World Cancer Research Fund/American
Institute for Cancer Research Report 2018, which included red meat \<0.5
serving per day, processed meat \<0.2 serving per day, dietary fiber 30
g/d, dairy products 3 servings per day, whole grains 48 g/d or account
for at least one-half of total grains, and calcium supplement use). CI ¼
confidence interval; CRC ¼ colorectal cancer; HR ¼ hazard ratio; MV ¼
multivariable; pys ¼ person-years. b Incidence and mortality rates were
age- and sex-standardized. c

Cox proportional hazards models were stratified by age, questionnaire
cycle, and cohort.

d

Cox proportional hazards models were stratified by age, questionnaire
cycle, and cohort and were further adjusted for ethnicity, current
multivitamin use, meno-

pausal status, and hormone use (women only). e Cox proportional hazards
models were stratified by age, questionnaire cycle, and cohort and were
further adjusted for ethnicity, current multivitamin use, menopausal
status, and hormone use (women only) and 8 individual risk factors
constituting the CRC risk score in continuous form (except aspirin use
and CRC family history as binary variables) to account for residual
confounding. f

The linear trend was assessed by including main effects of colonoscopy
screening and CRC risk score and their product term in the models, and
the P value for the product term was used as the Ptrend. We additionally
assessed the potential quadratic trend in the hazard ratios across the
CRC risk score groups by including a qua-

dratic term of CRC risk score and a product term between colonoscopy
screening and the quadratic CRC risk score. For CRC incidence, the
Ptrend was .73, .80, and .80 for the 3 models, respectively, and the
corresponding Ptrends were .76, .77, and .76 for CRC mortality.

screening and the risk factors influence CRC risk, it is not surprising
that we observed relatively consistent hazard ratios of colonoscopy
screening for CRC incidence and mortality across the CRC risk score
groups. However, given the effect of these risk factors for CRC
development and death, individuals with a higher CRC risk score are at a
higher risk of developing colorectal precancerous lesions and CRC
(65,66). It is thus understandable that colonoscopy screening may confer
a greater ARR of CRC incidence and mortality among individuals with
higher risk scores compared with lower risk scores. Our findings have
important clinical and public health implications. First, although
relative risk is important to determine the effect of screening, ARR is
a clinically more important indicator for decision making owing to its
indication for determining priorities in health-care services (67). Our
findings provide empirical evidence for setting screening priorities
among individuals at high risk of CRC. Such evidence is particularly
valuable given individuals at a higher risk of CRC tend to have a worse
health consciousness and are less likely to undergo screening (68).
These data indicate the need for developing actionable risk-based
screening strategies to improve health-care

delivery for better prevention of CRC. Second, we found that the
difference in screening-associated ARR across individuals with different
risk profiles was more pronounced for mortality of distal colon and
rectal cancers compared with proximal colon cancer. Because the
protective effect of endoscopic screening against cancer substantially
decreases from the rectum to proximal colon (69), our finding suggests a
particular merit of riskbased recommendations for colonoscopy screening
for prevention of distal colon and rectal cancers. The optimal age to
start screening represents an important aspect of screening
recommendation. The recent recommendations for lowering the starting age
of CRC screening in averagerisk adults from 50 to 45 years from both the
USPSTF and American Cancer Society are based on population-level
modeling analysis without accounting for the substantial variations in
CRC risk among individuals with different risk profiles (29,30). Given
that more than 80% of CRC cases have no family history of CRC (22) and
20% to 70% of CRC cases and deaths could potentially be prevented by
modifiable factors, for example, aspirin, BMI, smoking, alcohol,
physical activity, and diet (65,70,71), a more comprehensive CRC risk
profile including more than

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article/113/9/1177/6178004
by guest on 11 March 2024

Incidence No. of cases Colonoscopy screening Nonscreening Incidence
rate, per 100 000 pyb Colonoscopy screening Nonscreening Age-adjusted HR
(95% CI)c MV-adjusted HR (95% CI)d MV-adjusted HR (95% CI)e Mortality
No. of deaths Colonoscopy screening Nonscreening Mortality rate, per 100
000 pysb Colonoscopy screening Nonscreening Age-adjusted HR (95% CI)c
MV-adjusted HR (95% CI)d MV-adjusted HR (95% CI)e

0-2

ARTICLE

Subgroup model

1182 \| JNCI J Natl Cancer Inst, 2021, Vol. 113, No. 9

the first-degree relatives, no regular use of aspirin (\<2 tablets or
times per week), tall stature (upper 50% of height in each cohort),
overweight or obesity (body mass index 25.0 kg/m2), current smoker or
past smoker with 5 or more pack-years, low physical activity (\<30 min/d
of moderate-to-vigorous intensity activity), heavy alcohol intake (1
drink \[14 g alcohol\] per day for women and 2 drinks per day for men),
and unhealthy diet (meeting \<3 of the 6 dietary recommendations by the
World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research Report
2018, which included red meat \<0.5 serving per day, processed meat
\<0.2 serving per day, dietary fiber 30 g/d, dairy products 3 servings
per day, whole grains 48 g/d or account for at least one-half of total
grains, and calcium supplement use). Trend in the ARRs across CRC risk
scores was examined by regressing the multivariable-adjusted cumulative
risk on baseline colonoscopy screening status and CRC risk score as well
as their product term, whose P value was derived as the Ptrend. The
tests were 2-sided. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals.

ARTICLE Figure 2. Multivariable-adjusted 10-year cumulative mortality of
colorectal cancer (CRC) by subsite and corresponding absolute risk
reduction according to CRC risk score. CRC risk score (range ¼ 0-8) was
defined as the number of the 8 CRC high-risk factors: having a family
history of CRC among the first-degree relatives, no regular use of
aspirin (\<2 tablets or times per week), tall stature (upper 50% of
height in each cohort), overweight or obesity (body mass index 25.0
kg/m2), current smoker or past smoker with 5 or more pack-years, low
physical activity (\<30 min/d of moderate-to-vigorous intensity
activity), heavy alcohol intake (1 drink \[14 g alcohol\] per day for
women and 2 drinks per day for men), and unhealthy diet (meeting \<3 of
the 6 dietary recommendations by the World Cancer Research Fund/American
Institute for Cancer Research Report 2018, which included red meat \<0.5
serving per day, processed meat \<0.2 serving per day, dietary fiber 30
g/d, dairy products 3 servings per day, whole grains 48 g/d or account
for at least one-half of total grains, and calcium supplement use).
Trend in the ARRs across CRC risk scores was examined by regressing the
multivariable-adjusted cumulative risk on baseline colonoscopy screening
status and CRC risk score as well as their product term, whose P value
was derived as the Ptrend. The tests were 2-sided. Error bars indicate
95% confidence intervals.

just family history of CRC may inform more personalized recommendations
for the age to start CRC screening. In our current study, individuals
with the highest and lowest CRC risk profile may start screening 6-7
years earlier and later, respectively, than age 45 years as recently
recommended. This finding has implications for determining the optimal
age to start CRC screening among individuals with different risk
profiles in the context of the increasing incidence of early-onset CRC
(30,7274). Indeed, there has been an increasing body of evidence by

our group and others indicating the potential contribution of lifestyle
factors to early-onset CRC (75-79). Further research is needed to
evaluate the cost-benefit of the risk profile-based recommendations for
earlier or later screening. Our study has several strengths, including
the large sample size, long-term follow-up, and repeated assessments of
medical and lifestyle factors and colonoscopy screening. Several
limitations should also be noted. First, the information of lifestyle
factors and colonoscopy screening was self-reported and thus

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article/113/9/1177/6178004
by guest on 11 March 2024

Figure 1. Multivariable-adjusted 10-year cumulative incidence (left
panel) and mortality (right panel) of colorectal cancer (CRC) and the
corresponding absolute risk reduction (ARR) according to CRC risk score.
CRC risk score (range ¼ 0-8) was defined as the number of the 8 CRC
high-risk factors: having a family history of CRC among

K. Wang et al. \| 1183

the cost-effectiveness of the risk-based approach compared with the
current approach. We acknowledge that there is a long way ahead to
realize the promises of CRC precision prevention while believing that
our current study provides the proof of principle for that path. In
conclusion, the absolute benefits of colonoscopy screening for the
prevention of CRC and related death are more than twice higher for
individuals with the highest than lowest CRC risk profile. Individuals
with a high and low CRC risk profile may start CRC screening up to 6-7
years earlier and later, respectively, than the recommended age of 45
years or 50 years. Our data support the importance of risk-based
screening recommendations.

cer (CRC) by age in all participants and according to CRC risk score.
The crossed solid straight lines indicate the 10-year cumulative
incidence of CRC of 0.47% in the whole study population at age 45 years,
when CRC screening is recommended to start. The crossed dash straight
lines indicate the corresponding incidence of 0.68% at age 50 years.
Individuals with a CRC risk score of 0-2, 3, 4, 5, and 6-7 reached the
age 45 years threshold risk at age 51 years, 48 years, 45 years, 42
years, and 38 years, respectively. CRC risk score (range ¼ 0-8) was
defined as the number of the 8 CRC high-risk factors: having a family
history of CRC among the first-degree relatives, no regular use of
aspirin (\<2 tablets or times per week), tall stature (upper 50% of
height in each cohort), overweight or obesity (body mass index 25.0
kg/m2), current smoker or past smoker with 5 or more pack-years, low
physical activity (\<30 min/d of moderate-to-vigorous intensity
activity), heavy alcohol intake (1 drink \[14 g alcohol\] per day for
women and 2 drinks per day for men), and unhealthy diet (meeting \<3 of
the 6 dietary recommendations by the World Cancer Research Fund/American
Institute for Cancer Research Report 2018, which included red meat \<0.5
serving per day, processed meat \<0.2 serving per day, dietary fiber 30
g/d, dairy products 3 servings per day, whole grains 48 g/d or account
for at least one-half of total grains, and calcium supplement use).

subject to measurement error. However, the accuracy of these
self-reported data within our cohorts has been well documented
(6,80-84). Second, our study participants are health professionals and
predominantly Whites, thereby limiting the generalizability of our
findings. Nonetheless, because our participants tend to have a healthier
risk profile (65), the difference in the absolute benefit of screening
across risk profiles is likely to have been underestimated. Third, in
the calculation of riskadapted starting age of screening, we used our
cohort population to generate the threshold CRC risk. Because our cohort
participants have a healthier profile compared with the general
population, we may have underestimated the threshold CRC risk. Also, we
acknowledge that there may be possible cohort differences in the effect
of lifestyle or screening on CRC, although this should not have
influenced our findings for the differences in ages when the threshold
risk was reached in different risk groups. Moreover, it is unlikely that
the biological effect of the risk factors would be different between our
cohort participants and the general population. Nevertheless, further
studies in more recent birth cohorts are needed to better investigate
the optimal starting age for CRC screening for prevention of early-onset
CRC. Additionally, with an ultimate goal of CRC precision prevention, we
believe that further efforts are needed to improve the risk assessment
tools (to minimize the false negatives), integrate the tool into the
electronic health record system (to facilitate the use in the primary
care setting), and assess

Notes Role of the funder: The National Institutes of Health had no role
in the design, conduct, analysis, or reporting of this study. The
funding sources did not participate in the design and conduct of the
study; collection, management, analysis, and interpretation of the data;
preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript; and decision to
submit the manuscript for publication. Disclosures: Andrew T. Chan
previously served as a consultant for Bayer Pharma AG, Pfizer Inc., and
Janssen Pharmaceuticals for work unrelated to the topic of this
manuscript. This study was not funded by Bayer Pharma AG, Pfizer Inc.,
or Janssen Pharmaceuticals. No other conflict of interest exists. Author
contributions: Drs. Wang and Song have full access to all of the data in
the study and take responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis. Concept and design: Chan, Song, Wang.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: Wang, Song, Chan.
Drafting of the manuscript: Wang. Critical revision of the manuscript
for important intellectual content: Ma, Wu, Ogino, Giovannucci.
Statistical analysis: Wang. Obtained funding: Chan, Song.
Administrative, technical, or material support: Chan, Song, Giovannucci.
Supervision: Chan, Song. Acknowledgements: The authors thank the
participants and staff of the NHS and the HPFS for their continued
contributions, as well as the following state cancer registries for
their help: Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado,
Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa,
Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Nebraska,
New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Tennessee,
Texas, Virginia, Washington, and Wyoming. The authors assume full
responsibility for analyses and interpretation of these data.

ARTICLE

Figure 3. Multivariable-adjusted 10-year cumulative incidence of
colorectal can-

This work was supported by the American Cancer Society Mentored Research
Scholar grant (MRSG-17--220-01 - NEC to M.S.); by the U.S. National
Institutes of Health (NIH) grants (P01 CA87969 to M.J. Stampfer; U01
CA186107 to M.J. Stampfer; P01 CA55075, to W.C. Willett; UM1 CA167552 to
W.C. Willett; U01 CA167552 to L.A. Mucci and W.C. Willett; K24 DK098311,
R01 CA137178, R01 CA202704, R01 CA176726, to A.T.C.; K99 CA215314 and
R00 CA215314 to M.S.; R35 CA197735 and R01 CA151993 to S.O.). Dr Chan is
a Stuart and Suzanne Steele MGH Research Scholar.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article/113/9/1177/6178004
by guest on 11 March 2024

Funding

1184 \| JNCI J Natl Cancer Inst, 2021, Vol. 113, No. 9

Data Availability The data underlying this article will be shared on
reasonable request to the corresponding author. Because of the sensitive
nature of the data collected for this study, requests to access the
dataset from qualified researchers trained in human subject
confidentiality protocols may be sent to Brigham and Women's/ Harvard
Cohorts at https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQL
ScAPV23ZIBpkk9CyEJ1OcFJjMol9elKEpL YnPu7g3PgBL57XA/view form.

References

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article/113/9/1177/6178004
by guest on 11 March 2024

ARTICLE

1\. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2020. CA A Cancer
J Clin. 2020; 70(1):7--30. 2. Baxter NN, Goldwasser MA, Paszat LF, et
al. Association of colonoscopy and death from colorectal cancer. Ann
Intern Med. 2009;150(1):1--8. 3. Atkin WS, Edwards R, Kralj-Hans I, et
al.; UK Flexible Sigmoidoscopy Trial Investigators. Once-only flexible
sigmoidoscopy screening in prevention of colorectal cancer: a
multicentre randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2010;
375(9726):1624--1633. 4. Zauber AG, Winawer SJ, O'Brien MJ, et al.
Colonoscopic polypectomy and long-term prevention of colorectal-cancer
deaths. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(8): 687--696. 5. Baxter NN, Warren JL,
Barrett MJ, et al. Association between colonoscopy and colorectal cancer
mortality in a US cohort according to site of cancer and colonoscopist
specialty. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30(21):2664--2669. 6. Nishihara R, Wu K,
Lochhead P, et al. Long-term colorectal-cancer incidence and mortality
after lower endoscopy. N Engl J Med. 2013;369(12):1095--1105. 7. Doubeni
CA, Weinmann S, Adams K, et al. Screening colonoscopy and risk for
incident late-stage colorectal cancer diagnosis in average-risk adults:
a nested case-control study. Ann Intern Med. 2013;158(5 Pt 1):312--320.
8. Giorgi Rossi P, Vicentini M, Sacchettini C, et al. Impact of
screening program on incidence of colorectal cancer: a cohort study in
Italy. Am J Gastroenterol. 2015;110(9):1359--1366. 9. Lin JS, Piper MA,
Perdue LA, et al. Screening for colorectal cancer: updated evidence
report and systematic review for the US Preventive Services Task Force.
JAMA. 2016;315(23):2576--2594. 10. Bibbins-Domingo K, Grossman DC, Curry
SJ, et al.; US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for colorectal
cancer: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement.
JAMA. 2016;315(23):2564--2575. 11. Samadder NJ, Pappas L, Boucherr KM,
et al. Long-term colorectal cancer incidence after negative colonoscopy
in the state of Utah: the effect of family history. Am J Gastroenterol.
2017;112(9):1439--1447. niz X, Hsu J, Bretthauer M, et al.
Effectiveness of screening colo12. Garcıa-Albe noscopy to prevent
colorectal cancer among Medicare beneficiaries aged 70 to 79 years: a
prospective observational study. Ann Intern Med. 2017;166(1): 18--26.
13. Doubeni CA, Corley DA, Quinn VP, et al. Effectiveness of screening
colonoscopy in reducing the risk of death from right and left colon
cancer: a large community-based study. Gut. 2018;67(2):291--298. 14. Lee
JK, Jensen CD, Levin TR, et al. Long-term risk of colorectal cancer and
related deaths after a colonoscopy with normal findings. JAMA Intern
Med. 2019; 179(2):153--160. 15. Klabunde CN, Joseph DA, King, JB, et al.
Vital signs: colorectal cancer screening test use---United States, 2012.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2013;62(44): 881. 16. Fedewa SA, Sauer AG,
DeSantis C, et al. Disparities in cancer screening by occupational
characteristics. Prev Med. 2017;105:311--318. 17. Lin SC, McKinley D,
Sripipatana A, et al. Colorectal cancer screening at US community health
centers: examination of sociodemographic disparities and association
with patient-provider communication. Cancer. 2017;123(21): 4185--4192.
18. Sauer AG, Liu B, Siegel RL, et al. Comparing cancer screening
estimates: Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System and National
Health Interview Survey. Prev Med. 2018;106:94--100. 19. Tabaac AR,
Sutter ME, Wall CSJ, et al. Gender identity disparities in cancer
screening behaviors. Am J Prev Med. 2018;54(3):385--393. 20. Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention. Use of colorectal cancer screening
tests: 2018 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System. https://www.cdc.
gov/cancer/colorectal/statistics/use-screening-tests-BRFSS.htm. Accessed
on June 5, 2020. 21. Smith RA, Andrews KS, Brooks D, et al. Cancer
screening in the United States, 2019: a review of current American
Cancer Society guidelines and current issues in cancer screening. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2019;69(3):184--210. 22. Jeon J, Du M, Schoen RE, et al.;
Colorectal Transdisciplinary Study and Genetics and Epidemiology of
Colorectal Cancer Consortium. Determining risk of colorectal cancer and
starting age of screening based on lifestyle, environmental, and genetic
factors. Gastroenterology. 2018;154(8):2152--2164. e19.

23\. Hsu L, Jeon J, Brenner H, et al.; Genetics and Epidemiology of
Colorectal Cancer Consortium (GECCO). A model to determine colorectal
cancer risk using common genetic susceptibility loci. Gastroenterology.
2015;148(7):1330--9. e14. 24. Win AK, Macinnis RJ, Hopper JL, et al.
Risk prediction models for colorectal cancer: a review. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev. 2012;21(3):398--410. 25. Dunlop MG, Tenesa A,
Farrington SM, et al. Cumulative impact of common genetic variants and
other risk factors on colorectal cancer risk in 42,103 individuals. Gut.
2013;62(6):871--881. 26. Wei EK, Colditz GA, Giovannucci EL, et al. A
comprehensive model of colorectal cancer by risk factor status and
subsite using data from the Nurses' Health Study. Am J Epidemiol.
2017;185(3):224--237. 27. Carr PR, Weigl K, Edelmann D, et al.
Estimation of absolute risk of colorectal cancer based on healthy
lifestyle, genetic risk, and colonoscopy status in a population-based
study. Gastroenterology. 2020;159(1):129--138. e9. 28. Siegel RL, Miller
KD, Goding Sauer A, et al. Colorectal cancer statistics, 2020. CA A
Cancer J Clin. 2020;70(3):145--164. 29. US Preventive Services Task
Force. Draft Recommendation Statement: Colorectal Cancer Screening.
2020. https://uspreventiveservicestaskforce.
org/uspstf/draft-recommendation/colorectal-cancer-screening3#fullrecommendationstart.
Accessed on June 5, 2020. 30. Wolf AMD, Fontham ETH, Church TR, et al.
Colorectal cancer screening for average-risk adults: 2018 guideline
update from the American Cancer Society. CA Cancer J Clin.
2018;68(4):250--281. 31. Tian Y, Kharazmi E, Brenner H, et al.
Calculating the starting age for screening in relatives of patients with
colorectal cancer based on data from large nationwide data sets.
Gastroenterology. 2020;159(1):159--168.e3. 32. Rimm EB, Giovannucci EL,
Willett WC, et al. Prospective study of alcohol consumption and risk of
coronary disease in men. Lancet. 1991;338(8765): 464--468. 33. Colditz
GA, Manson JE, Hankinson SE. The Nurses' Health Study: 20-year
contribution to the understanding of health among women. J Womens
Health. 1997;6(1):49--62. 34. Fuchs CS, Giovannucci EL, Colditz GA, et
al. A prospective study of family history and the risk of colorectal
cancer. N Engl J Med. 1994;331(25):1669--1674. 35. Ahsan H, Neugut AI,
Garbowski GC, et al. Family history of colorectal adenomatous polyps and
increased risk for colorectal cancer. Ann Intern Med. 1998;
128(11):900--905. 36. Botteri E, Iodice S, Bagnardi V, et al. Smoking
and colorectal cancer: a metaanalysis. JAMA. 2008;300(23):2765--2778.
37. Botteri E, Borroni E, Sloan EK, et al. Smoking and colorectal cancer
risk, overall and by molecular subtypes: a meta-analysis. Am J
Gastroenterol. 2020; 115(12):1940--1949. 10.14309/ajg.0000000000000803.
38. Limsui D, Vierkant RA, Tillmans LS, et al. Cigarette smoking and
colorectal cancer risk by molecularly defined subtypes. J Natl Cancer
Inst. 2010;102(14): 1012--1022. 39. Ning Y, Wang L, Giovannucci EL. A
quantitative analysis of body mass index and colorectal cancer: findings
from 56 observational studies. Obes Rev. 2010; 11(1):19--30. 40.
Moghaddam AA, Woodward M, Huxley R. Obesity and risk of colorectal
cancer: a meta-analysis of 31 studies with 70,000 events. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2007;16(12):2533--2547. 41. Slattery ML,
Edwards S, Curtin K, et al. Physical activity and colorectal cancer. Am
J Epidemiol. 2003;158(3):214--224. 42. Nilsen TI, Vatten LJ. Prospective
study of colorectal cancer risk and physical activity, diabetes, blood
glucose and BMI: exploring the hyperinsulinaemia hypothesis. Br J
Cancer. 2001;84(3):417--422. 43. Moskal A, Norat T, Ferrari P, et al.
Alcohol intake and colorectal cancer risk: a dose-response meta-analysis
of published cohort studies. Int J Cancer. 2007; 120(3):664--671. 44.
Cho E, Smith-Warner SA, Ritz J, et al. Alcohol intake and colorectal
cancer: a pooled analysis of 8 cohort studies. Ann Intern Med.
2004;140(8):603--613. 45. Drew DA, Cao Y, Chan AT. Aspirin and
colorectal cancer: the promise of precision chemoprevention. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2016;16(3):173--186. 46. Rothwell PM, Wilson M, Elwin CE, et al.
Long-term effect of aspirin on colorectal cancer incidence and
mortality: 20-year follow-up of five randomised trials. Lancet.
2010;376(9754):1741--1750. 47. Chan AT, Ogino S, Fuchs CS. Aspirin and
the risk of colorectal cancer in relation to the expression of COX-2. N
Engl J Med. 2007;356(21):2131--2142. 48. Thrift AP, Gong J, Peters U, et
al.; GIANT Consortium. Mendelian randomization study of height and risk
of colorectal cancer. Int J Epidemiol. 2015;44(2): 662--672. 49.
Khankari NK, Shu XO, Wen W, et al.; Transdisciplinary Research in Cancer
of the Lung (TRICL). Association between adult height and risk of
colorectal, lung, and prostate cancer: results from meta-analyses of
prospective studies and Mendelian randomization analyses. PLoS Med.
2016;13(9):e1002118. 50. Mehta RS, Nishihara R, Cao Y, et al.
Association of dietary patterns with risk of colorectal cancer subtypes
classified by Fusobacterium nucleatum in tumor tissue. JAMA Oncol.
2017;3(7):921--927. 51. Song M, Garrett WS, Chan AT. Nutrients, foods,
and colorectal cancer prevention. Gastroenterology.
2015;148(6):1244--60. e16.

K. Wang et al. \| 1185

ARTICLE

69\. Wang L, Lo CH, He X, et al. Risk factor profiles differ for cancers
of different regions of the colorectum. Gastroenterology.
2020;159(1):241--256. e13. 70. Platz EA, Willett WC, Colditz GA, et al.
Proportion of colon cancer risk that might be preventable in a cohort of
middle-aged US men. Cancer Causes Control. 2000;11(7):579--588. 71.
Erdrich J, Zhang X, Giovannucci E, et al. Proportion of colon cancer
attributable to lifestyle in a cohort of US women. Cancer Causes
Control. 2015;26(9): 1271--1279. 72. Liang PS, Allison J, Ladabaum U, et
al. Potential intended and unintended consequences of recommending
initiation of colorectal cancer screening at age 45 years.
Gastroenterology. 2018;155(4):950--954. 73. Imperiale TF, Kahi CJ, Rex
DK. Lowering the starting age for colorectal cancer screening to 45
years: who will come. . . and should they? Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol.
2018;16(10):1541--1544. 74. Ladabaum U, Mannalithara A, Meester RG, et
al. Cost-effectiveness and national effects of initiating colorectal
cancer screening for average-risk persons at age 45 years instead of 50
years. Gastroenterology. 2019;157(1):137--148. 75. Zheng X, Hur J,
Nguyen LH, et al. Comprehensive assessment of diet quality and risk of
precursors of early-onset colorectal cancer \[published online ahead of
print\]. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2020;10.1093/jnci/djaa164. 76. Nguyen LH,
Liu PH, Zheng X, et al. Sedentary behaviors, TV viewing time, and risk
of young-onset colorectal cancer. JNCI Cancer Spectr. 2018;2(4):pky073.
77. Liu PH, Wu K, Ng K, et al. Association of obesity with risk of
early-onset colorectal cancer among women. JAMA Oncol. 2019;5(1):37--44.
78. Akimoto N, Ugai T, Zhong R, et al. Rising incidence of early-onset
colorectal cancer - a call to action. Nat Rev Clin Oncol.
2021;18(4):230--243. 10.1038/s41571-020-00445-1. 79. Low EE, Demb J, Liu
L, et al. Risk factors for early-onset colorectal cancer.
Gastroenterology. 2020;159(2):492--501. e7. 80. Rimm EB, Stampfer MJ,
Colditz GA, et al. Validity of self-reported waist and hip
circumferences in men and women. Epidemiology. 1990;1(6):466--473. 81.
Chasan-Taber S, Rimm EB, Stampfer MJ, et al. Reproducibility and
validity of a self-administered physical activity questionnaire for male
health professionals. Epidemiology. 1996;7(1):81--86. 82. Giovannucci E,
Ascherio A, Rimm EB, et al. Physical activity, obesity, and risk for
colon cancer and adenoma in men. Ann Intern Med. 1995;122(5):327--334.
83. Wark PA, Wu K, van 't Veer P, et al. Family history of colorectal
cancer: a determinant of advanced adenoma stage or adenoma multiplicity?
Int J Cancer. 2009;125(2):413--420. 84. Kavanagh AM, Giovannucci EL,
Fuchs CS, et al. Screening endoscopy and risk of colorectal cancer in
United States men. Cancer Causes Control. 1998;9(4): 455--462.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article/113/9/1177/6178004
by guest on 11 March 2024

52\. Mehta RS, Song M, Nishihara R, et al. Dietary patterns and risk of
colorectal cancer: analysis by tumor location and molecular subtypes.
Gastroenterology. 2017;152(8):1944--1953. e1. 53. World Cancer Research
Fund/American Institute for Cancer R. Diet, nutrition, physical activity
and cancer: a global perspective. Continuous Update Project Expert
Report 2018. Accessed on June 7, 2020. 54. van Dam RM, Li T, Spiegelman
D, et al. Combined impact of lifestyle factors on mortality: prospective
cohort study in US women. BMJ. 2008;337:a1440. 55. Willett WC, Sampson
L, Stampfer MJ, et al. Reproducibility and validity of a
semiquantitative food frequency questionnaire. Am J Epidemiol.
1985;122(1): 51--65. 56. Stampfer MJ, Willett WC, Speizer FE, et al.
Test of the National Death Index. Am J Epidemiol. 1984;119(5):837--839.
57. Mukama T, Kharazmi E, Xing X, et al. Risk-adapted starting age of
screening for relatives of patients with breast cancer. JAMA Oncol.
2020;6(1):68--74. 58. Brenner H, Chang-Claude J, Seiler CM, et al.
Long-term risk of colorectal cancer after negative colonoscopy. J Clin
Oncol. 2011;29(28):3761--3767. 59. Knudsen AB, Zauber AG, Rutter CM, et
al. Estimation of benefits, burden, and harms of colorectal cancer
screening strategies: modeling study for the US Preventive Services Task
Force. JAMA. 2016;315(23):2595--2609. 60. Hull MA, Rees CJ, Sharp L, et
al. A risk-stratified approach to colorectal cancer prevention and
diagnosis. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020;17(12):773--780. 61.
Giovannucci E. Insulin and colon cancer. Cancer Causes Control.
1995;6(2): 164--179. 62. Chan AT, Giovannucci EL. Primary prevention of
colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology. 2010;138(6):2029--2043. e10. 63.
Tabung FK, Liu L, Wang W, et al. Association of dietary inflammatory
potential with colorectal cancer risk in men and women. JAMA Oncol.
2018;4(3): 366--373. 64. Chen J, Giovannucci EL, Hunter DJ. MTHFR
polymorphism, methyl-replete diets and the risk of colorectal carcinoma
and adenoma among U.S. men and women: an example of gene-environment
interactions in colorectal tumorigenesis. J Nutr. 1999;129(2S
Suppl):560s--564s. 65. Song M, Giovannucci E. Preventable incidence and
mortality of carcinoma associated with lifestyle factors among White
adults in the United States. JAMA Oncol. 2016;2(9):1154--1161. 66. He X,
Wu K, Ogino S, et al. Association between risk factors for colorectal
cancer and risk of serrated polyps and conventional adenomas.
Gastroenterology. 2018;155(2):355--373. e18. 67. Bretthauer M.
Colorectal cancer screening. J Intern Med. 2011;270(2):87--98. 68.
Sewitch MJ, Fournier C, Ciampi A, et al. Adherence to colorectal cancer
screening guidelines in Canada. BMC Gastroenterol. 2007;7:39.

3/12/24, 1:23 AM

Estimating Breast Cancer Risk (Gail Model) \| Susan G. Komen®

Estimating Breast Cancer Risk (the Gail Model) Your health care provider
looks at which risk factors you have and how high of a risk those
factors are linked to in order to estimate your risk of breast cancer.

A few factors, such as having a BRCA1 or BRCA2 inherited gene mutation,
are

linked to a high risk of breast cancer. However, most known risk factors
are linked to a small or modestly increased risk. Exactly which risk
factors should be used to estimate breast cancer risk is still under
study.

Although men can get breast cancer, the tools used today to estimate
breast cancer risk are only used to estimate risk for women. Learn more
about breast cancer in men.

The Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool (the Gail Model) The Breast
Cancer Risk Assessment Tool (the Gail model) is often used by health
care providers to estimate risk. Although the tool can estimate your
risk, it can't tell whether or not you'll get breast cancer.

The tool calculates a woman's risk of developing breast cancer within
the next 5 years and within her lifetime (up to age 90). It uses 7 key
risk factors for breast cancer: • Age • Age at first period • Age at the
time of the birth of a first child (or has not given birth)

https://www.komen.org/breast-cancer/risk-factor/understanding-risks/gail-method/

1/5

Estimating Breast Cancer Risk (Gail Model) \| Susan G. Komen® g ( g •
Family history of breast cancer (mother, sister or daughter)

3/12/24, 1:23 AM

)

• Number of past breast biopsies • Number of breast biopsies showing
atypical hyperplasia • Race/ethnicity

Women with a 5-year risk of 1.67% or higher are classified as
"high-risk." A 5-year

risk of 1.67% or higher is the FDA guideline for taking a risk-lowering
drug to reduce breast cancer risk.

Individual risk versus group risk The Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool
can't predict whether or not you'll get breast cancer. It doesn't
calculate an individual woman's breast cancer risk.

Instead, the tool gives the average risk of breast cancer for a group of
women with similar risk factors. It's not clear what this risk means for
any one woman. Say the tool gives you a 5-year risk of 1%. This means
the tool estimates 1% of women who have risk factors similar to yours
will develop breast cancer over the

next 5 years. However, the tool can't predict which of these women will
get breast cancer.

How to interpret your estimated breast cancer risk The Breast Cancer
Risk Assessment Tool was designed to be used by health care providers.
So, if you use the tool on your own, it may be hard to understand the
results and use the information to make decisions about your care. If
you have questions about your breast cancer risk based on the results of
this tool, talk with your health care provider.

Limits of the Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool The Breast Cancer Risk
Assessment Tool doesn't use all the known (established) risk factors for
breast cancer to assess risk. The tool also doesn't give a good risk
estimate for some women, including those with a \[1\]:

• Personal history of invasive breast cancer or ductal carcinoma in situ
(DCIS) • Personal history of lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS) • BRCA1 or
BRCA2 inherited gene mutation

https://www.komen.org/breast-cancer/risk-factor/understanding-risks/gail-method/

2/5

3/12/24, 1:23 AM

Estimating Breast Cancer Risk (Gail Model) \| Susan G. Komen®

• BRCA1 or BRCA2 inherited gene mutation

The original model was based on data from white women in the U.S. with
data from the National Institutes of Health's Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program data. The tool can now
estimate risk for: • Black women, using data from the Contraceptive and
Reproductive Experiences (CARE) Study and SEER data • Asian and Pacific
Islander women in the U.S., using data from the Asian

American Breast Cancer Study and SEER data • Hispanic women, using data
from the San Francisco Bay Area Breast Cancer Study, the California
Cancer Registry, the California SEER Program and SEER data The model may
not work as well for other racial and ethnic groups. Visit the National
Cancer Institute website to learn more about the Breast Cancer Risk
Assessment Tool.

Other breast cancer risk assessment tools Some tools, such as IBIS (the
Tyrer-Cuzik model) and BOADICEA, use family history and other factors to
estimate breast cancer risk. Such tools can be used for women who have
one or more relatives with breast cancer or ovarian cancer.

The BWHS (Black Women's Health Study) Breast Cancer Risk Calculator tool
is

based on data from Black women in the U.S. The tool uses a woman's
personal and family health history as well as her reproductive history
to estimate her breast cancer risk.

Looking ahead at breast cancer risk assessment As research in risk
assessment grows, tools like the Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool will
be better able to predict breast cancer risk in large groups of women.

Talking with your health care provider about your risk of breast cancer
If you have questions about your risk of breast cancer, talk with your
doctor, nurse or other health care provider.

f i i i
https://www.komen.org/breast-cancer/risk-factor/understanding-risks/gail-method/

i

f

3/5

3/12/24, 1:23 AM

Estimating Breast Cancer Risk (Gail Model) \| Susan G. Komen®

Your family health history plays a role in your breast cancer risk.
Before you meet with your health care provider, it's helpful to collect
information about your family health history.

Information on any cancers diagnosed in both the women and men in your
family (and the ages when they were first diagnosed) will be helpful in
assessing your breast cancer risk.

If you're considering genetic testing to learn if a family history of
cancer is due to

an inherited gene mutation related to cancer risk, talk with your health
care provider or a genetic counselor. They can help you decide if
genetic testing is right for you and your family.

Learn more about inherited gene mutations. Learn more about family
history of breast cancer and breast cancer risk.

My Family Health History Tool

My Family Health History tool is a web-based tool that makes it easy for
you to record and organize your family health history. It helps you
gather information that will be useful as you talk with your family
members, doctor or genetic counselor. Updated 03/30/23

TOOLS & RESOURCES Donate Now

Stay

Connected











https://www.komen.org/breast-cancer/risk-factor/understanding-risks/gail-method/

4/5

3/12/24, 1:23 AM

Estimating Breast Cancer Risk (Gail Model) \| Susan G. Komen®

© 2024 Susan G. Komen is a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization. EIN
75-1835298

https://www.komen.org/breast-cancer/risk-factor/understanding-risks/gail-method/

5/5

FRAMINGHAM RISK SCORE (FRS)

Date:

Estimation of 10-year Cardiovascular Disease (CVD) Risk

Step 11

Step 21

In the "points" column enter the appropriate value according to the
patient's age, HDL-C, total

Age 30-34 35-39 40-44 45-49 50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69 70-74 75+ HDL-C
(mmol/L) \>1.6 1.3-1.6 1.2-1.29 0.9-1.19 \<0.9 Total Cholesterol \<4.1
4.1-5.19 5.2-6.19 6.2-7.2 \>7.2 Systolic Blood Pressure (mmHg) \<120
120-129 130-139 140-149 150-159 160+ Yes Smoker No Yes Diabetes No Total
Points

Risk Points

Points

Men

Women

0 2 5 7 8 10 11 12 14 15

0 2 4 5 7 8 9 10 11 12

Not Treated -2 0 1 2 2 3

-2 -1 0 1 2

-2 -1 0 1 2

0 1 2 3 4

0 1 3 4 5

Treated 0 2 3 4 4 5

Not Treated -3 0 1 2 4 5

Total Points -3 or less -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
17 18 19 20 21+

Using the total points from Step 1, determine heart age (in years).

10-Year CVD Risk (%)\* Men Women \<1 \<1 1.1 \<1 1.4 1.0 1.6 1.2 1.9 1.5
2.3 1.7 2.8 2.0 3.3 2.4 3.9 2.8 4.7 3.3 5.6 3.9 6.7 4.5 7.9 5.3 9.4 6.3
11.2 7.3 13.3 8.6 15.6 10.0 18.4 11.7 21.6 13.7 25.3 15.9 29.4 18.51
\>30 21.5 \>30 24.8 \>30 27.5 \>30 \>30

Heart Age, y

Men

Women

\<30 30 31 32 34 36 38 39 40 42 45 48 51 54 55 57 59 60 64 68 72 73 76
79 \>80

\<0 0

\<1 1

1 2 3 4

2 3 4

5 6 7 8 9 10

5 6 7 8 9

11

10

12 13 14 15

11 12 13

16

14 15+

≥17

\* Double cardiovascular disease risk percentage for individuals between
the ages of 30 and 59 without diabetes if the presence of a positive
history of premature cardiovascular disease is present in a first-degree
relative before 55 years of age for men and before 65 years of age for
women. This is known as the modified Framingham Risk Score.3

Step 42,3

Using 10-year CVD risk from Step 2, determine if patient is Low,
Moderate or High risk.† Indicate Lipid and/or Apo B targets Risk Level†

Treated -1 2 3 5 6 7

4 3 0 0 statin-indicated condition 0 0

1 Adapted from: D'Agostino RB et al.(i). General cardiovascular risk
profile for use in primary care. The Framingham Heart Study. Circ
2008;117:743-53. 2 Adapted from: Genest J et al.(i). 2009 Canadian
Cardiovascular Society/Canadian guidelines for the diagnosis and
treatment of dyslipidemia and prevention of cardiovascular disease in
the adult. Can J Cardiol. 2009;25(10):567-579. 3 Adapted from: Anderson
T et al.(i). 2012 Update of the Canadian Cardiovascular Society
guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of dyslipidemia for the
prevention of cardiovascular disease in the adult. Can J Cardiol.
2013;29(2):151-167. ‡ apoB: apolipoprotein B stat, CVD: cardiovascular
disease, FRS: Framingham Risk Score, HDL-C: high-density lipoprotein
cholesterol, LDL-C: low-density lipoprotein cholesterol. \* Statins
indicated as initial therapy \*\* Consider LDL-C \< 1.8 mmol/L for
subjects with acute coronary syndrome (ACS) within past 3 months

Provided courtesy of

Step 31

Using the total points from Step 1, determine the 10-year CVD risk\*
(%).

cholesterol, systolic blood pressure, and if they smoke or have
diabetes. Calculate the total points.

Risk Factor

Patient's Name:

Initiate Treatment If:

Primary Target (LDL-C)

Alternate Target

High FRS ≥20%

• Consider treatment in all (Strong, High)

• ≤2 mmol/L or ≥50% decrease in LDL-C (Strong, Moderate)

• Apo B ≤0.8 g/L or • Non-HDL-C ≤2.6 mmol/L (Strong, High)

Intermediate FRS 10-19%

• LDL-C ≥3.5 mmol/L (Strong, Moderate) • For LDL-C \<3.5 mmol/L consider
if: • Apo B ≥1.2 g/L • OR Non-HDL-C ≥4.3 mmol/L (Strong, Moderate) • Men
≥50 and women ≥60 with 1 risk factor: low HDL-C, impaired fasting
glucose, high waist circumference, smoker, hypertension

• ≤2 mmol/L or ≥50% decrease in LDL-C (Strong, Moderate)

• Apo B ≤0.8 g/L or • Non-HDL-C ≤2.6 mmol/L (Strong, Moderate)

Low FRS \<10%

• statins generally not indicated

• statins generally not indicated

• statins generally not indicated

Statin-indicated conditions\*\*

• Clinical atherosclerosis\* • Abdominal aortic aneurysm • Diabetes
mellitus Age ≥ 40 years 15-Year duration for age ≥ 30 years (DM1)
Microvascular disease • Chronic kidney disease (age ≥ 50 years) eGFR
\<60 mL/min/1.73 m2 or ACR \> 3 mg/mmol

Lipid targets LDL-C:\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

or

Apo B:\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Original Article

Risk Assessment of Diabetes Using the Indian Diabetes Risk Score: A
Study on Young Medical Students from Northern India Mongjam Meghachandra
Singh, Vipra Mangla, Ruchira Pangtey, Suneela Garg Department of
Community Medicine, Maulana Azad Medical College and Associated
Hospitals, New Delhi, India

Abstract Context: Identification of risk factors of diabetes is required
among youth as diabetes in young persons is now spreading in epidemic
proportions. Indian Diabetes Risk Score (IDRS) is a validated and
cost‑ effective tool to identify risk of diabetes among population.
Aims: Present study was conducted among young medical students to assess
risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) using the IDRS and to study
association of risk of diabetes with other factors. Materials and
Methods: A cross‑sectional study was conducted among 290 first grade
medical students from July 2017 to December 2017. A semi‑structured
interview schedule was developed for data collection. Written informed
consent was taken. Statistical Analysis Used: SPSS version 25 was used
for data analysis. 'P' \< 0.05 was considered as statistically
significant. Results: A total of 290 medical students were included in
the study. IDRS categorization revealed 77%, 22% and 1% students in
low‑, moderate‑ and high‑risk category, respectively. Statistically
significant association of moderate‑high diabetes risk with male gender,
positive family history of diabetes, no/mild physical activity and body
mass index (BMI) ≥23 kg/m2 was seen. Conclusion: Present study findings
has brought forth that large number (23%) of young medical students were
in moderate‑high risk category of developing T2DM and health
professionals should be more vigilant in young obese males with minimal
physical activity and positive family history of disease. Hence, there
is a pressing need for bringing out behaviour change communication among
young medical students so that risk reduction strategies and lifestyle
changes can be implemented in early years of their lives. Keywords:
Indian Diabetes Risk Score, medical students, type 2 diabetes mellitus

Context Diabetes mellitus is a major public health problem which affects
all age groups and has now been identified in youth. Indian Diabetes
Risk Score (IDRS), devised and developed by Mohan et al. at the Madras
Diabetes Research Foundation, is a validated tool to identify
individuals with high risk of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM)
in future. It considers four risk factors namely age, family history,
abdominal obesity and physical activity.\[1\] Medical students usually
have sedentary lifestyle owing to academic requirements and limited
studies on diabetes screening have been conducted among them. Present
study was thus formulated to assess risk score using the IDRS and to
study association of T2DM risk with other factors among medical
students.

Subjects and Methods Present cross‑sectional study was conducted among
first grade medical students of a medical college in Delhi from July
2017 Access this article online Quick Response Code:

86

to December 2017. Sample size was estimated assuming that 40% of
students would have moderate to high risk score.\[2\] Sample size was
estimated using the formula 4 pq/L², where prevalence (p) = 40%, q =
60%, relative error (L) = 15% of prevalence and estimated sample size
came out to be 266. For our study, we took a sample size of 290. Data
collection tools were: a. A s e m i ‑ s t r u c t u r e d i n t e r v i
e w s c h e d u l e f o r socio‑demographic details of subjects like
age, gender, total family members, education/occupation of parents and
physical activity. Dietary history of fruits and vegetables intake was
obtained using the World Health Address for correspondence: Dr. Vipra
Mangla, Department of Community Medicine, Maulana Azad Medical College,
New Delhi ‑ 110 002, India. E‑mail: vipramangla@yahoo.com

This is an open access journal, and articles are distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution‑NonCommercial‑ShareAlike 4.0
License, which allows others to remix, tweak, and build upon the work
non‑commercially, as long as appropriate credit is given and the new
creations are licensed under the identical terms.

Website: www.ijem.in

For reprints contact: reprints@medknow.com

DOI: 10.4103/ijem.IJEM_623_18

How to cite this article: Singh MM, Mangla V, Pangtey R, Garg S. Risk
assessment of diabetes using the Indian Diabetes Risk Score: A study on
young medical students from Northern India. Indian J Endocr Metab
2019;23:86-90.

© 2019 Indian Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism \| Published by
Wolters Kluwer - Medknow

Singh, et al.: Risk assessment of diabetes using the Indian Diabetes
Risk Score

b\. c.

Organization (WHO) dietary assessment questionnaire. Education and
occupation status were classified as per the Kuppuswamy's method of
social classification. Grades of BMI (modified for Asians) were
used.\[3\] Dietary history was taken as per the National Nutrition
Guidelines.\[4\] Adequate fruit consumption was defined as consumption
of 100 g of fruit (portion size = 100 g × number of portions = 1) every
day in a typical week. One portion of fruit consumption was defined as
100 g or 2/3 average size apple or 37 g of guava or 1/2 banana or one
average size orange (92 g). Adequate vegetable consumption was defined
as intake of ≥300 g of vegetables (portion size = 100 g × number of
portions = 3) every day in a typical week. One portion of vegetable was
defined as consumption of 50 g of green leafy vegetable or potato, 200 g
of other vegetables and 50 g of roots and tubers Anthropometric
measurements (height, weight, waist circumference, hip circumference and
blood pressure) were measured using standard methods and noted Risk
factor profile was found out using the IDRS. Age was categorized into
\<35 years coded as 0 (score: 0), 35--49 years as 1 (score: 20) and ≥50
years as 2 (score: 30).

Abdominal obesity was found out using waist circumference. Subjects with
waist circumference \<80 cm (female), \<90 cm (male) were coded as 0
(score: 0); waist circumference ≥81--89 cm (female), ≥91--99 cm (male)
as 1 (score: 10) and waist circumference ≥90 cm (female), ≥100 cm (male)
as 2 (score: 20). Vigorous intensity activities were defined as
activities that cause large amount of effort, rapid breathing and a
substantial increase in heart rate for at least 10 min continuously.
Moderate intensity activities were defined as activities that required
moderate amount of effort and noticeably accelerated heart rate for at
least 10 min continuously. For physical activity categorization,
subjects performing regular vigorous exercise or strenuous (manual)
activities at home/work were coded as 0 (score: 0); regular moderate
exercise or moderate physical activities at home/work were coded as 1
(score: 10); regular mild exercise or mild physical activities at
home/work were coded as 2 (score: 20); no exercise and/or sedentary
activities at home/work were coded as 2 (score: 30).

the Chi‑square test (χ2) was used. 'P' \< 0.05 was considered
statistically significant.

Ethical considerations

Ethical clearance was taken from the Ethics Committee. Written informed
consent was taken from study participants. Confidentiality of the data
was maintained at all steps and data were used only for this research.

Results A total of 290 medical students were included in the study, of
which 119 (41.0%) were males and 171 (59.0%) were females. Mean and
median age of subjects was 18.48 ± 1.3 years and 18 years, respectively.
Age range was 17--27 years, 25th quartile of age was 18 years and 75th
quartile was 19 years. Mean and median monthly per capita income was Rs
26114.0 ± 49182.5 and Rs 13166.6, respectively. Table 1 shows group‑wise
distribution of subjects in IDRS risk groups.

Dietary habits

Fruit consumption was adequate in 101 (34.8%) and inadequate in 189
(65.2%) subjects. Vegetable consumption was adequate in 81 (28.0%) and
inadequate in 209 (72.0%) subjects. Average intake of fruits and
vegetables was two portions per day each. Average number of days in a
typical week with fruit consumption and average number of servings
consumed on those days was 5 days a week and two portions, respectively.
Average number of days in a typical week with vegetable consumption and
average number of portions consumed on those days was 6 days a week and
two servings, respectively. Mustard oil was most often used 106 (36.5%)
for meal preparation in subject homes. Average number of days subjects
ate from outside home was 2 days.

Physical activity

Vigorous intensity activities were carried out by 67 (23.0%) subjects,
average number of days in atypical week, in which these activities were
carried out was 1 day per week and average time spent doing them was 24
min per day. Moderate intensity activities were carried out by 93
(32.0%) subjects, average number of days in atypical week, in which
these activities were carried out was 2 days per week and average time
spent doing them was 30 min per day.

Subjects with no family history of diabetes were coded as 0 (score: 0);
with one diabetic parent as 1 (score: 10) and with both diabetic parents
as 2 (score: 20). Subjects with IDRS \<30 were graded as low risk,
30--50 as medium risk and ≥60 as high risk. Subjects detected with
diabetes risk score of \>30 were referred to tertiary care hospital for
getting their blood sugar levels checked and further follow up.

Anthropometric Examination

Data analysis

Group (risk score)

No. of subjects (%)

Mean risk score

Group I (\<30) Group II (30‑50) Group III (≥60) Total no. (%)

222 (77) 67 (22) 1 (1) 100 (100)

12 34 60

Data were entered and analyzed using the SPSS version 25. Quantitative
data were expressed as mean, median, standard deviation and 95%
confidence interval (CI) was calculated. Qualitative data were expressed
as percentage/proportion and

Mean height of males and females (cm) was 172 ± 13.32 and 160 ± 6.34,
respectively. Mean weight (kg) of males and Table 1: Group‑wise
distribution of subjects in risk groups (n=290)

Indian Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism ¦ Volume 23 ¦ Issue 1 ¦
January-February 2019

87

Singh, et al.: Risk assessment of diabetes using the Indian Diabetes
Risk Score

females was 69.80 ± 13.59 and 58.88 ± 10.64, respectively. Mean waist
circumference and hip circumference (cm) of males and females was 81.91
± 12.75, 76.94 ± 10.88, 96.85 ± 11.35 and 96.32 ± 8.31, respectively.
Waist--hip ratio of \<0.9 and ≥0.9 was seen in 81 (68.0%) and 38 (32.0%)
male subjects. Waist--hip ratio of \<0.8 and ≥0.8 was seen in 41 (82.5%)
and 30 (17.5%) female subjects. Table 2 shows IDRS component‑wise
distribution among subjects. Table 3 shows distribution of
characteristics with the IDRS among study subjects. In male subjects --
low and moderate diabetes risk was present in 68% and 32%, respectively.
In female subjects -- low, moderate and high diabetes risk was present
in 82.5%, 16.9% and 0.6%, respectively. Table 4 shows association of
characteristics with IDRS. Statistically significant association of
moderate‑high diabetes risk with male gender (P = 0.0069), positive
family history of diabetes (P = 0.001), no/mild physical activity (P \<
0.0001) and body mass index (BMI) ≥23.0 kg/m2 (P = 0.009) was found.

Discussion Present study was conducted in 290 first grade medical
students and revealed that 222 (77%), 67 (22%) and 1 (1%) subjects were
in low‑, moderate‑ and high‑risk category as per the IDRS, respectively.
Findings for high‑risk category were similar to study conducted by
Gopalakrishnan et al. (1.9%) and Bhatia et al. (1%).\[5,6\] Studies by
Subramani et al., Kumar et al., Mohan et al. and Chowdhury et al.,
showed 12.1%, 18.6%, 31.2% and 31.5% in high‑risk category,
respectively.\[7-10\] Similar observation for moderate‑risk category was
found in the study conducted by Vardhan et al. (28%).\[11\] Higher
figures for moderate‑risk category were found in studies conducted by
Chowdhury et al. (46%), Mohan et al. (50.3%), Bhatia et al. (68%) and
Subramani et al. (74.7%).\[6-7,9,10\]

Current study showed statistically significant association of
moderate‑high diabetes risk with male gender and with higher BMI (P =
0.0069 and 0.009, respectively). This finding may be because of the fact
that young Asian males are at a higher risk of developing diabetes and
also people with higher BMI tend to develop T2DM at a younger age.\[12\]
Similar statistically significant association between male gender and
higher BMI with increased diabetes risk was present in a study conducted
by Gopalakrishnan et al. and Chowdhury et al.\[5,10\]

IDRS risk components findings

Present study showed that IDRS risk components -- positive family
history of diabetes, decreased physical activity and increased abdominal
circumference in 53 (18.3%), 130 (44.8%) and 133 (45.9%) students,
respectively. Positive family history of diabetes in our study 22
(41.5%) with moderate‑high diabetes risk was found to be statistically
significant (P = 0.001). Studies have shown family history as an
independent risk factor for T2DM.\[13\] Almost similar figures of
positive family history of diabetes was found in a study conducted by
Subramani et al. (16.6%), Bhatia et al. (32%), Gopalakrishnan et al.
(46.6%).\[5--7\] Study by Adhikari et al. showed that 45--80% children
who develop T2DM had a parent with the disease.\[14\] In our study,
vigorous, moderate, mild and no physical activity was carried out by 40
(14%), 90 (31%), 93 (32%) and 67 (23%) subjects, respectively.
Association between no/mild physical activity and moderate‑high diabetes
risk was statistically significant (P \< 0.0001). Our study corroborates
with the findings from several studies which have shown that physical
activity less than the recommended values for moderate exercise (\<150
min per week) does increase the risk of T2DM.\[15\] Findings for
moderate physical activity are similar to results of study conducted by
Bhatia et al. (49%).\[6\] Higher figure for moderate physical activity
was

Table 2: Risk score components of study subjects (n=290) IDRS components
Waist circumference (cm) ≤80 (female) ≤90 (male) ≥81‑89 (female) ≥91‑99
(male) ≥90 (female) ≥100 (male) Physical activity Regular vigorous
exercise or strenuous (manual) activities Regular moderate exercise or
moderate physical activities Regular mild exercise or mild physical
activities No exercise and/or sedentary activities Family history of
diabetes No diabetes in parents One parent is diabetic Both parents are
diabetic IDRS=Indian Diabetes Risk Score 88

No. of subjects

Percentage (%)

136 81 22 23 13 15

79.0 68.0 13.0 19.0 8.0 13.0

40 90 93 67

14.0 31.0 32.0 23.0

237 53 0

82.0 18.0 0.0

Indian Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism ¦ Volume 23 ¦ Issue 1 ¦
January-February 2019

Singh, et al.: Risk assessment of diabetes using the Indian Diabetes
Risk Score

Table 3: Distribution of characteristics among subjects with IDRS
(n=290) Characteristic Gender Males Females Father's education
Illiterate Primary school Middle school certificate High school
certificate \>10th class Mother's education Illiterate Primary school
Middle school certificate High school certificate \>10th class Father's
occupation Unskilled worker, unemployed Semi‑skilled worker; skilled
worker; clerk, shop owner, farm owner Semi‑professional, professional
Mother's occupation Unskilled worker, unemployed Semi‑skilled worker;
skilled worker; clerk, shop owner, farm owner Semi‑professional,
professional BMI (kg/m2) as per modified Asian criteria Underweight
(\<18.5) Normal (18.5‑23) Overweight (23‑27.5) Obese (≥27.5) IDRS=Indian
Diabetes Risk Score; BMI=Body mass index

Low risk (%)

Moderate risk (%)

High risk (%)

Total (%)

81 (68.0) 141 (82.5)

38 (32.0) 29 (16.9)

0 (0.0) 1 (0.6)

119 (41.0) 171 (59.0)

1 (33.3) 5 (100.0) 8 (88.9) 162 (73.6) 46 (86.8)

1 (33.3) 0 (0.0) 1 (11.1) 58 (26.4) 7 (13.2)

1 (33.4) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0)

3 (1.0) 5 (1.7) 9 (3.1) 220 (75.9) 53 (18.3)

15 (83.3) 11 (84.6) 8 (57.1) 146 (93.6) 42 (47.2)

3 (16.7) 2 (15.4) 5 (35.7) 10 (6.4) 47 (52.8)

0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 1 (7.2) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0)

18 (6.2) 13 (4.5) 14 (4.8) 156 (53.8) 89 (30.7)

6 (66.7) 147 (88.0) 69 (60.5)

2 (22.2) 20 (12.0) 45 (39.5)

1 (11.1) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0)

9 (3.1) 167 (57.6) 114 (39.3)

14 (43.8) 4 (9.8) 204 (94.0)

17 (53.1) 37 (90.2) 13 (6.0)

1 (3.1) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0)

32 (11.0) 41 (14.2) 217 (74.8)

31 (81.6) 99 (83.2) 73 (82.0) 19 (43.2)

7 (18.4) 20 (16.8) 16 (18.0) 24 (54.5)

0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 1 (2.3)

38 (13.1) 119 (41.0) 89 (30.7) 44 (15.2)

Table 4: Association of characteristics among subjects with IDRS (n=290)
Characteristic Gender Males Females Father's education ≤10th class
\>10th class Mother's education ≤10th class \>10th class Father's
occupation Unskilled/unemployed/semi‑skilled/skilled worker
Semi‑professional/professional Mother's occupation
Unskilled/unemployed/semi‑skilled/skilled worker Semi‑professional,
professional Dietary habits Mixed Vegetarian Family history

Moderate‑high risk (%)

Low risk (%)

Total (%)

Odds ratio (unadjusted)

95% CI

χ2, df, 'P'

38 (32.0) 30 (17.5)

81 (68.0) 141 (82.5)

119 (41.0) 171 (59.0)

2.20

1.27‑3.82

7.31, 1, 0.0069

58 (24.5) 10 (18.9)

179 (75.5) 43 (81.1)

237 (81.7) 53 (18.3)

1.39

0.65‑2.94

0.48, 1, 0.48

48 (23.9) 20 (22.5)

153 (76.1) 69 (77.5)

201 (69.3) 89 (30.7)

1.08

0.59‑1.96

0.01, 1, 0.92

45 (25.6) 23 (20.2)

131 (74.4) 91 (79.8)

176 (60.7) 114 (39.3)

1.35

0.76‑2.40

0.84, 1, 0.35

18 (24.7) 50 (23.0)

55 (75.3) 167 (77.0)

73 (25.2) 217 (74.8)

1.09

0.58‑2.02

0.01, 1, 0.92

44 (26.8) 24 (19.0)

120 (73.2) 102 (81.0)

164 (56.6) 126 (43.4)

1.55

0.88‑2.73

1.99, 1, 0.15

Contd\... Indian Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism ¦ Volume 23 ¦
Issue 1 ¦ January-February 2019

89

Singh, et al.: Risk assessment of diabetes using the Indian Diabetes
Risk Score

Table 4: Contd\... Characteristic

Low risk (%)

Total (%)

Odds ratio (unadjusted)

95% CI

χ2, df, 'P'

22 (41.5) 46 (19.4)

31 (58.5) 191 (80.6)

53 (18.3) 237 (81.7)

2.94

1.56‑5.55

10.59, 1, 0.001

54 (41.5) 14 (8.8)

76 (58.5) 146 (91.2)

130 (44.8) 160 (55.2)

7.40

3.86‑14.19

41.15, 1, \<0.0001

41 (30.8) 27 (17.2)

92 (69.2) 130 (82.8)

133 (45.9) 157 (54.1)

2.14

1.23‑3.73

6.71, 1, 0.009

Moderate‑high risk (%)

Present Absent Physical activity No/mild physical activity Moderate to
vigorous BMI (kg/m2) BMI ≥23 BMI \<23 IDRS=Indian Diabetes Risk Score,
BMI=body mass index

seen in a study conducted by Gopalakrishnan et al. (76.5%) and Subramani
et al. (74.7%).\[5,7\]

Strengths and limitations of the study

Present study has used simplified IDRS tool to assess T2DM risk among
young medical students and this tool can also be used for mass screening
among this population. Limitation of the study is that cross‑sectional
analysis does not permit observation of trend of diabetes risk among the
subjects over time. Also, as the study was conducted in the younger age
group, so the effect of age on diabetes risk could not be considered.

Conclusion It is alarming that 68 (23%) subjects as evident in our study
have moderate‑high risk of developing T2DM and the association of risk
with male gender, positive family history of diabetes, mild physical
activity and higher BMI was found to be statistically significant (P \<
0.05). Current study findings highlight the importance and need to focus
and strengthen health promotion and Information Education and
Communication activities in young population so as to reduce the future
burden of disease. There is an urgent requirement of early
identification of our at‑risk population of young medical students and
to increase awareness among our future healthcare professionals, so that
interventions viz. behaviour change communication and lifestyle
modifications can be instituted at the earliest to prevent/delay onset
of diabetes mellitus and its complications in later life. Large studies
in community settings are required to be conducted to find
population‑based prevalence rate of risk factors of diabetes among the
young.

Financial support and sponsorship Nil.

Conflicts of interest

There are no conflicts of interest.

90

References 1.

Mohan V, Deepa R, Deepa M, Somannavar S, Datta M. A simplified Indian
Diabetes Risk Score for screening for undiagnosed diabeticsubjects. J
Assoc Physicians India 2005;53:759‑63. 2. Wild S, Roglic G, Green A,
Sicree R, King H. Global prevalence of diabetes, estimates for the year
2000 and projections for 2030. Diabetes Care 2004;27:1047‑53. 3.
Geissler C, Powers HJ, editors. Human Nutrition: Obesity.13th ed. United
Kingdom: Oxford University Press; 2017;20:406-23. 4. Krishnaswamy K,
Bhaskaram P, Bhat RV, Ghafoorunissa RT, Raghuramulu N. Dietary
Guidelines for Indians: A Manual. Hyderabad: National Institute of
Nutrition, Indian Council of Medical Research; 2011. 5. Gopalakrishnan
S, Rama R, Muthulakshmi M. Assessing the risk of developing type 2
diabetes mellitus among medical students in Chennai using Indian
diabetes risk score. Int J Community Med Public Health 2017;4:2366‑72.
6. Bhatia T, Maitreyi O, Vimisha D, Sonalika B, Gerhard F, Vaidehi L, et
al. Type 2 diabetes mellitus: Risk evaluation and advice in
undergraduate students in Mumbai. Int J Pharm Sci Invent 2014:3:37‑40.
7. Subramani R, Devi U, Shankar U, Stephen T, Karthik RC, Seshadhri S,
et al. Assessment of risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus among rural
population in Tamil Nadu by using Indian Diabetic Risk Score.
Middle‑East J Sci Res 2014;21:223‑5. 8. Gupta SK, Singh Z, Purty AJ,
Vishwanathan M. Diabetes prevalence and its risk factors in urban
Pondicherry. Int J Diabetes Dev Ctries 2009;29:166‑9. 9. Mohan V,
Sandeep S, Deepa R, Shah B, Varghese C. Epidemiology of type 2 diabetes:
Indian scenario. Indian J Med Res 2007;125:217‑30. 10. Chowdhury R,
Mukherjee A, Lahiri SK. A study on distribution and determinants of
Indian Diabetic Risk Score (IDRS) among rural population of West Bengal.
National J Med Res 2012;2:282‑6. 11. Vardhan A, Prabha MRA, Shashidhar
MK, Shankar N, Gupta S, Tripathy A. Value of Indian Diabetes Risk Score
among medical students and its correlation with fasting plasma glucose,
blood pressure and lipid profile. J Clin Diagn Res 2012;6:1528‑30. 12.
Rhee EJ. Diabetes in Asians. Endocrinol Metab 2015;30:263‑9. 13.
InterAct Consortium. The link between family history and risk of type 2
diabetes is not explained by anthropometric, lifestyle or genetic risk
factors: The EPIC‑InterAct study. Diabetologia 2013;56:60‑9. 14.
Adhikari P, Pathak R, Kotian S. Validation of the MDRF‑Indian Diabetes
Risk Score (IDRS) in another South Indian population through the Boloor
Diabetes Study (BDS). J Assoc Physicians India 2010;58:434‑6. 15.
Ghaderpanahi M, Fakhrzadeh H, Sharifi F, Badamchizade Z, Mirarefin M,
Ebrahim RP, et al. Association of physical activity with risk of type 2
diabetes. Iran J Public Health 2011;40:86‑93.

Indian Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism ¦ Volume 23 ¦ Issue 1 ¦
January-February 2019

HHS Public Access Author manuscript Author Manuscript

Asia Pac J Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016
January 23. Published in final edited form as: Asia Pac J Public Health.
2016 January ; 28(1 0): 26S--31S. doi:10.1177/1010539515604701.

A Risk Score to Predict Hypertension in Primary Care Settings in Rural
India Thirunavukkarasu Sathish, MBBS, MPH1,2, Srinivasan Kannan, PhD1,
P. Sankara Sarma, PhD1, Oliver Razum, MSc3, Amanda Gay Thrift, PhD4, and
Kavumpurathu Raman Thankappan, MD, MPH1 1Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute
for Medical Sciences and Technology, Trivandrum, Kerala, India

Author Manuscript

2The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia 3Bielefeld
University, Bielefeld, Germany 4Monash University, Clayton, VIC,
Australia

Abstract

Author Manuscript

We used the data of 297 participants (15--64 years old) from a cohort
study (2003--2010) who were free from hypertension at baseline, to
develop a risk score to predict hypertension by primary health care
workers in rural India. Age ≥35 years, current smoking, prehypertension,
and central obesity were significantly associated with incident
hypertension. The optimal cutoff value of ≥3 had a sensitivity of 78.6%,
specificity of 65.2%, positive predictive value of 41.1%, and negative
predictive value of 90.8%. The area under the receiver operating
characteristic curve of the risk score was 0.802 (95% confidence
interval = 0.748--0.856). This simple and easy to administer risk score
could be used to predict hypertension in primary care settings in rural
India.

Keywords hypertension; incidence; India; Kerala; primary care; risk
score; screening

Introduction

Author Manuscript

Hypertension has emerged as a major global public health issue. Of the
17 million deaths that occur every year as a result of cardiovascular
diseases, the contribution of hypertension and its complications are
more than 50%.1 In India, the number of adults with hypertension is
projected to nearly double from 59.1 million in 2000 to 106.8 million by
2025.2 Clinical trials have shown that intervening with lifestyle
modification or medications for individuals at high risk for
hypertension may delay the onset of hypertension.3,4 Therefore,
screening

Reprints and permissions: sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Corresponding Author: Thirunavukkarasu Sathish, Melbourne School of
Population and Global Health, The University of Melbourne, Parkville,
VIC 3010, Australia. speaktosat@gmail.com. Declaration of Conflicting
Interests The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
The contents of this article are solely the responsibility of the
authors and do not reflect the views of VIDS or the ASCEND Program.

Sathish et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

tools for early identification of high-risk individuals have been
developed for this purpose.5 However, there are no such tools available
for Asian Indians living in rural areas. We, therefore, aimed to develop
a simple risk score to predict hypertension by primary health care
workers in rural India.

Methods Study Sample

Author Manuscript

The study design has been described in detail elsewhere.6--8 In brief,
in 2003, a large-scale cross-sectional survey was conducted among 2510
individuals aged 15 to 64 years in rural areas of Thiruvananthapuram
district in the state of Kerala, India to investigate the burden of risk
factors for non-communicable diseases.9 From this study sample, we
selected 495 participants through a systematic random sampling technique
and followed-up in 2010, of whom, 452 (91.3%) were re-examined. After
excluding those with hypertension (n = 154) and 1 pregnant woman at
baseline, 297 individuals remained eligible for the present analysis.
All participants provided written informed consent, and the study was
approved by the institutional ethics committee of the Sree Chitra
Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology,
Thiruvananthapuram. Measurements

Author Manuscript

At baseline, we collected data on demographic measures; smoking; alcohol
use; intake of fruits and vegetables; physical activity; clinical
measures, including height, weight, waist circumference, and blood
pressure (BP); and biochemical measures, including fasting plasma
glucose and serum lipids. At both baseline and follow-up, BP was
measured using the World Health Organization (WHO) protocol10 using an
identical BP apparatus. BP was taken on the right arm of seated
participants (rested for at least 5 minutes) using an OMRON digital
automatic BP monitor (OMRON-4, Omron Corporation, Kyoto, Japan) with an
appropriate cuff size. Only if there was a difference in the 2 initial
readings with systolic or diastolic BP \>10 mm Hg, a third reading was
taken, and the average BP was derived accordingly. Hypertension was
defined as systolic BP ≥140 mm Hg, and/or diastolic BP ≥90 mm Hg, and/or
current use of BP-lowering medications.11 Statistical Analysis

Author Manuscript

We compared selected baseline characteristics according to the status of
hypertension at follow-up using Pearson's χ2 test. We used a logistic
regression model (forward likelihood ratio method) to derive the risk
factors for incident hypertension. To keep the risk score simple, we did
not include interaction terms, variables that are difficult to measure
in primary care settings (eg, physical activity), or biochemical
measures in the model. The variables included in the model were age
(\<35 and ≥35 years), sex, years of schooling, daily intake of fruits or
vegetables, current smoking (smoked any tobacco products in the past 30
days),10 alcohol use (had at least 1 standard drink of alcohol: 30 mL of
spirits, 285 mL of beer, or 120 mL of wine in the past 1 year), blood
pressure (normal, systolic BP \<120 mm Hg and diastolic BP \<80 mm Hg;
and pre-hypertension, systolic BP 120 to 139 mm Hg or diastolic BP 80 to
89 mm Hg),11 central obesity (waist circumference ≥85 cm in males and
≥80 cm in females),12 and history of high blood glucose. We included
waist circumference

Asia Pac J Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016
January 23.

Sathish et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

in the model instead of BMI because waist circumference was a better
predictor of incident hypertension than BMI as we have shown before.6
Model fitness was assessed by the Hosmer Lemeshow test. The β
Coefficient of each category of a variable was rounded to the nearest
integer to assign a score. The reference category of each variable was
given a value of 0. The total score was obtained by adding the scores of
each variable. The area under the receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) curve was used to obtain the optimal cutoff value for the risk
score. We calculated sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value, and negative predictive value for the optimal cutoff. Data
analyses were performed using Statistical Package for Social Sciences
for Windows, version 17.0 (SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL).

Results Author Manuscript

Of the 297 individuals who were free of hypertension at baseline, 70
(23.6%) developed hypertension over a mean (standard deviation \[SD\])
follow-up period of 7.1 (0.2) years. The mean age of the study sample at
baseline was 36.1 (13.7) years. Participants with hypertension at
follow-up were older, were more likely to be current smokers, had
greater waist circumference, and were more likely to be prehypertensive
and to have history of high blood glucose at baseline, compared with
those without hypertension at follow-up (Table 1).

Author Manuscript

Age ≥35 years, current smoking, prehypertension, and central obesity
were significantly associated with incident hypertension (Table 2). The
model showed a good fit (HosmerLemeshow P = .940). The total score
ranged between 0 and 5, with a mean (SD) total score of 2.2 (1.5). The
incidence of hypertension over 7 years rose with higher risk score
categories: 0 to 1, 3.6%; 2 to 3, 22.4%; 4 to 5, 53.2%; P \< .001. The
optimal cutoff value of ≥3 had a sensitivity of 78.6%, specificity of
65.2%, positive predictive value of 41.1%, and negative predictive value
of 90.8%. The area under the ROC curve of the risk score was 0.802 (95%
confidence interval = 0.748--0.856; Figure 1). The format of the new
risk score is given in Figure 2.

Discussion

Author Manuscript

This is the first risk score developed to predict hypertension in rural
India. It is simple and easy to administer by health care workers in
primary care settings. The primary health care workers can assess an
individual's risk of developing hypertension in future and encourage him
or her to adopt healthy lifestyles and have their BP checked regularly.
The risk score emphasizes the importance of quitting smoking and
reducing waist circumference in the prevention of hypertension.6 This
score may also be useful for screening and recruiting high-risk
individuals into hypertension prevention trials. However, the risk score
requires validation before it can be widely used. There are certain
limitations to the study that need attention. First, the study had a
relatively small sample size. However, the number of events (incident
hypertension) per predictor variable were sufficient to run a
multivariate logistic regression analysis on the study sample,
minimizing type II error.13 Second, we could not calculate the near- or
long-term risk of hypertension, as reported in other studies,5 because
we followed the cohort only once. Third, there is a possibility of
regression to the mean for BP14 because measurements

Asia Pac J Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016
January 23.

Sathish et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

were repeated on the same individuals over time. We minimized this by
taking the average of 2 or more BP readings at both baseline and
follow-up. Fourth, one could also argue that prevention of hypertension
is better targeted at educating the whole population. However, the use
of a risk prediction model within the primary care setting may further
reduce the progression to hypertension in high-risk individuals.
Finally, measures for testing the performance of prediction models are
debatable in the literature. According to Cook, ROC curves
(discrimination) may not be optimal for models predicting future risk,
whereas calibration is more accurate.15 On the other hand, some argue
that reporting discrimination will always be essential for prediction
models.16 Therefore, we reported both calibration (Hosmer-Lemeshow test
P = .940) and discrimination (area under ROC = 0.802) for our risk
score.

Conclusion Author Manuscript

This simple and easy to administer risk score could be used to predict
hypertension in primary care settings in rural India.

Acknowledgments Funding The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following
financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of
this article: TS is supported by the prestigious Victoria India Doctoral
Scholarship (VIDS) from the Government of Victoria for his PhD at The
University of Melbourne, Australia. In addition, TS was supported by the
ASCEND Program, funded by the Fogarty International Centre of the
National Institutes of Health under Award Number D43TW008332.

References Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

1\. World Health Organization. \[Accessed February 20, 2015\] A global
brief on hypertension. http://
apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/79059/1/WHO_DCO_WHD_2013.2_eng.pdf 2.
Kearney PM, Whelton M, Reynolds K, Muntner P, Whelton PK, He J. Global
burden of hypertension: analysis of worldwide data. Lancet. 2005;
365:217--223. \[PubMed: 15652604\] 3. Julius S, Nesbitt SD, Egan BM, et
al. Trial of Preventing Hypertension (TROPHY) Study Investigators.
Feasibility of treating prehypertension with an angiotensin-receptor
blocker. N Engl J Med. 2006; 354:1685--1697. \[PubMed: 16537662\] 4. He
J, Whelton PK, Appel LJ, Charleston J, Klag MJ. Long-term effects of
weight loss and dietary sodium reduction on incidence of hypertension.
Hypertension. 2000; 35:544--549. \[PubMed: 10679495\] 5.
Echouffo-Tcheugui JB, Batty GD, Kivimäki M, Kengne AP. Risk models to
predict hypertension: a systematic review. PLoS One. 2013;
8:e67370.10.1371/journal.pone.0067370 \[PubMed: 23861760\] 6. Sathish T,
Kannan S, Sarma PS, Razum O, Thankappan KR. Incidence of hypertension
and its risk factors in rural Kerala, India: a community-based cohort
study. Public Health. 2012; 126:25--32. \[PubMed: 22133670\] 7. Sathish
T, Kannan S, Sarma PS, Thankappan KR. Incidence of tobacco use among
adults (15--64 years) in rural Kerala, India. Asia Pac J Public Health.
2015; 27:NP626-9.10.1177/1010539513485787 \[PubMed: 23666836\] 8.
Sathish T, Kannan S, Sarma PS, Thankappan KR. Achutha Menon Centre
Diabetes Risk Score: a type 2 diabetes screening tool for primary health
care providers in rural India. Asia Pac J Public Health. 2015;
27:147--154. \[PubMed: 22865719\]

Asia Pac J Public Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016
January 23.

Sathish et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

9\. Thankappan KR, Shah B, Mathur P, et al. Risk factor profile for
chronic non-communicable diseases: results of a community-based study in
Kerala, India. Indian J Med Res. 2010; 131:53--63. \[PubMed: 20167974\]
10. World Health Organization. \[Accessed February 20, 2015\] The STEPS
manual. http:// www.who.int/chp/steps/manual/en/ 11. US Department of
Health and Human Services. \[Accessed February 20, 2015\] Prevention,
detection, evaluation and treatment of high blood pressure.
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/files/docs/ guidelines/jnc7full.pdf 12.
Snehalatha C, Viswanathan V, Ramachandran A. Cutoff values for normal
anthropometric variables in Asian Indian adults. Diabetes Care. 2003;
26:1380--1384. \[PubMed: 12716792\] 13. Vittinghoff E, McCulloch CE.
Relaxing the rule of ten events per variable in logistic and Cox
regression. Am J Epidemiol. 2007; 165:710--718. \[PubMed: 17182981\] 14.
Barnett AG, Van der Pols JC, Dobson AJ. Regression to the mean: what it
is and how to deal with it. Int J Epidemiol. 2005; 34:215--220.
\[PubMed: 15333621\] 15. Cook NR. Use and misuse of the receiver
operating characteristic curve in risk prediction. Circulation. 2007;
15:928--935. \[PubMed: 17309939\] 16. Steyerberg EW, Vickers AJ, Cook
NR, et al. Assessing the performance of prediction models: a framework
for some traditional and novel measures. Epidemiology. 2010;
21:128--138. \[PubMed: 20010215\]

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Asia Pac J Public Health. Author
manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 23.

Sathish et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Figure 1.

Area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of the new risk
score: 0.802 (95% confidence interval = 0.748--0.856).

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Asia Pac J Public Health. Author
manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 23.

Sathish et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

Figure 2.

Format of the new risk score.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Asia Pac J Public Health. Author
manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 23.

Sathish et al.

Page 8

Table 1

Author Manuscript

Baseline Characteristics According to the Hypertension Status at
Follow-up.a Hypertension at Follow-up, n = 70

P Value

90 (39.6)

57 (81.4)

\<.001

Male

106 (46.7)

36 (51.4)

.497

Current smokingb

28 (12.3)

18 (25.7)

.013

Alcohol usec

45 (19.8)

20 (28.6)

.137

Daily intake of fruits or vegetables

208 (91.6)

61 (87.1)

.251

Normal

106 (46.7)

11 (15.7)

\<.001

Prehypertension

121 (53.3)

59 (84.3)

Central obesitye

90 (39.6)

49 (70.0)

\<.001

History of high blood glucose

8 (3.5)

9 (12.9)

.007

Characteristic

No Hypertension at Follow-up, n = 227

Age ≥35 years

Blood pressure (BP)d

Author Manuscript

a

The values are given as n (%).

b

Smoking in the past 30 days.

c

Consumption of at least 1 standard of alcohol (30 mL of spirits, 285 mL
of beer, or 120 mL of wine) in the past 1 year.

d Normal: systolic BP \<120 mm Hg and diastolic BP \<80 mm Hg;
Prehypertension: systolic BP 120 to 139 mm Hg or diastolic BP 80 to 89
mm Hg. e Waist circumference ≥85 cm in males and ≥80 cm in females.

Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Asia Pac J Public Health. Author
manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 23.

Sathish et al.

Page 9

Table 2

Author Manuscript

Results of Multivariate Analysis.a β Coefficient

OR (95% CI)

\<35

0

1

≥35

1.5

4.7 (2.3--9.4)

No

0

1

Yes

0.9

2.6 (1.1--5.8)

No

0

1

Yes

1.3

3.7 (1.8--7.8)

Characteristic

P Value

Scoreb

Age (years) 0 \<.001

2

Current smokingc 0 .023

1

Prehypertensiond 0 \<.001

1

Author Manuscript

Central obesitye No

0

1

Yes

1.2

3.2 (1.6--6.3)

0 .001

Total score

1 5

Abbreviations: OR, odds ratio; CI, confidence interval. a

Variables not significant in the model: sex, years of schooling, daily
intake of fruits or vegetables, alcohol use, normal blood pressure, and
history of high blood glucose. b

β Coefficient rounded to the nearest integer.

c

Smoking in the past 30 days.

d

Prehypertension: systolic BP 120 to 139 mm Hg or diastolic BP 80 to 89
mm Hg.

e

Author Manuscript

Waist circumference ≥85 cm in males and ≥80 cm in females.

Author Manuscript Asia Pac J Public Health. Author manuscript; available
in PMC 2016 January 23.

SCORE - European High Risk Chart 10 year risk of fatal CVD in high risk
regions of Europe by gender, age, systolic blood pressure, total
cholesterol and smoking status SCORE 15% and over 10% - 14% 5% - 9% 3% -
4%

Systolic blood pressure (mmHg)

Non-smoker

fatal CVD in

Men

populations at high CVD risk

Smoker

Age

Non-smoker

Smoker

180 7 160 5

8

9 10 12

13 15 17 19 22

14 16 19 22 26

26 30 35 41 47

5

6

7

8

9 10 12 13 16

9 11 13 15 16

18 21 25 29 34

140 3 120 2

3

4

5

6

6

7

8

9 11

6

8

9 11 13

13 15 17 20 24

2

3

3

4

4

5

5

6

4

5

6

9

9 10 12 14 17

180 4 160 3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 13

9 11 13 15 18

18 21 24 28 33

3

3

4

5

5

6

7

8

9

6

7

9 10 12

12 14 17 20 24

140 2 120 1

2

2

3

3

3

4

5

5

6

4

5

6

7

8 10 12 14 17

1

2

2 2

2

3

3

4

4

3

3

4

5 6

180 2 160 1

2

3

3

4

4

5

5

6

7

6

7

8 10 12

12 13 16 19 22

2

2

2

3

3

3

4

4

5

4

5

6

7

8

8

9 11 13 16

140

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

3

3

3

3

4

5

6

5

6

8

9 11

120

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

2

3

3

4

4

4

5

6

180

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

3

3

4

4

4

5

6

7

7

8 10 12 14

160

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

3

2

3

3

4

5

5

6

7

8 10

140 0 120 0

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

3

3

3

4

5

6

7

0

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

3

3

4

5

180 0 160 0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

3

3

4

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

3

140 0 120 0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

4

5

6

7

8

4

5

6

7

8

4

5

6

7

8

4

5

6

7

8

65

7

60

55

50

40 Cholesterol (mmol/L)

7

9

6

7

8 10 12

8

©ESC 2018

Women

2% 1% \< 1%

10-year risk of

150 200 250 300

mg/dL

Use the high risk charts in other European countries. Of these, some are
at very high risk and the charts may underestimate risk in these. These
include Albania, Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bulgaria, Egypt,
Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, FYR Macedonia, Moldova, Russian
Federation, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and
Uzbekistan. \*Updated, re-calibrated charts are now available for
Belgium, Germany, Greece, The Netherlands, Spain, Sweden and Poland.

2\. Find the cell nearest to the person's age, cholesterol and BP
values, bearing in mind that risk will be higher as the person
approaches the next age, cholesterol or BP category. 3. Check the
qualifiers 4. Establish the total 10 year risk for fatal CVD.

Note that a low total cardiovascular risk in a young person may conceal
a high relative risk; this may be explained to the person by using the
relative risk chart. As the person ages, a high relative risk will
translate into a high total risk. More intensive lifestyle advice will
be needed in such persons. This chart refers to relative risk, not
percentage risk, so that a person in the top right corner is at 12 times
higher risk than a person in the bottom left corner. Another approach to
explaining risk to younger persons is to use cardiovascular risk age.
For example, in the high risk chart, a 40 year old male hypertensive
smoker has a risk of 4%, which is the same as a 65 year old with no risk
factors, so that his risk age is 65. This can be reduced by reducing his
risk factors.

Non-Smoker

Smoker

180 3 160 2

3

4

5

6

6

7

8 10 12

3

3

4

4

4

5

6

7

140

1

2

2

2

3

3

3

4

5

6

120

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

3

3

4

4

5

6

7

8

4

5

6

7

8

Cholesterol (mmol/L)

Visit www.heartscore.org For the interactive version of the SCORE risk
charts Source: European Guidelines on CVD Prevention in Clinical
Practice 2016 Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2016 Jul;23(11):NP1-NP96. doi:
10.1177/2047487316653709

8

©ESC 2018

1\. Use the low risk charts in Andorra, Austria, Belgium\*, Cyprus,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece\*, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, The Netherlands\*, Norway, Portugal,
San Marino, Slovenia, Spain\*, Sweden\*, Switzerland and the United
Kingdom.

Risk estimation using SCORE: Qualifiers

Relative Risk Charts

Systolic Blood Pressure (mmHg)

How do I use the SCORE charts to assess CVD risk in asymptomatic
persons?

• The charts should be used in the light of the clinician's knowledge
and judgement, especially with regard to local conditions. • As with all
risk estimation systems, risk will be over-estimated in countries with a
falling CVD mortality rate, and under estimated if it is rising. • At
any given age, risk appears lower for women than men. However,
inspection of the charts shows that their risk is merely deferred by 10
years, with a 60 year old woman resembling a 50 year old man in terms of
risk. • Risk may be higher than indicated in the chart in: - Sedentary
or obese subjects, especially those with central obesity - Those with a
strong family history of premature CVD - Socially deprived individuals
and those from some ethnic minorities - Individuals with diabetes- the
SCORE charts should only be used in those with type 1 diabetes without
target-organ damage; Other diabetic subjects are already at high to very
high risk. - Those with low HDL cholesterol\* or increased triglyceride,
fibrinogen, apoB, Lp(a) levels and perhaps increased high-sensitivity
CRP. - Asymptomatic subjects with evidence of pre-clinical
atherosclerosis, for example plaque on ultrasonography. - Those with
moderate to severe chronic kidney disease (GFR \<60 mL/min/1.73 m2)
\*Note that HDL cholesterol impacts on risk in both sexes, at all ages,
and at all level of risk. This effect can be estimated using the
electronic version of SCORE, HeartScore, which has been updated to
include HDL cholesterol level.

SCORE - European Low Risk Chart 10 year risk of fatal CVD in low risk
regions of Europe by gender, age, systolic blood pressure, total
cholesterol and smoking status SCORE 15% and over 10% - 14% 5% - 9% 3% -
4%

Systolic blood pressure (mmHg)

Non-smoker

fatal CVD in

Men

populations at low CVD risk

Smoker

Non-smoker

Age

Smoker

180 4 160 3

5

6

6

7

9

9 11 12 14

8

9 10 12 14

15 17 20 23 26

3

4

4

5

6

6

7

8 10

5

6

7

8 10

10 12 14 16 19

140 2 120 1

2

2

3

3

4

4

5

6

7

4

4

5

6

7

7

8

9 11 13

1

2

2

2

3

3

3

4

4

2

3

3

4

5

5

5

6

180 3 160 2

3

3

4

4

5

5

6

7

8

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 13 15 18

2

2

2

3

3

4

4

5

5

3

4

5

5

6

7

8

9 11 13

140

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

3

3

4

2

3

3

4

4

5

5

6

7

9

120

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

3

2

2

2

3

3

3

4

4

5

6

180

1

1

2

2

2

3

3

3

4

4

3

4

4

5

6

6

7

8 10 12

160

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

3

3

2

2

3

3

4

4

5

6

7

8

140

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

1

2

2

2

3

3

3

4

5

6

120 0

0

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

3

3

4

180

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

2

3

3

4

4

4

5

6

7

160 0 140 0

0

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

3

3

4

5

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

3

3

120 0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

180 0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

160 0 140 0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

1

120 0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

4

5

6

7

8

4

5

6

7

8

4

5

6

7

8

4

5

6

7

8

65

60

55

50

40 Cholesterol (mmol/L)

8

9

©ESC 2018

Women

2% 1% \< 1%

10-year risk of

150 200 250 300

mg/dL

Use the high risk charts in other European countries. Of these, some are
at very high risk and the charts may underestimate risk in these. These
include Albania, Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bulgaria, Egypt,
Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, FYR Macedonia, Moldova, Russian
Federation, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and
Uzbekistan. \*Updated, re-calibrated charts are now available for
Belgium, Germany, Greece, The Netherlands, Spain, Sweden and Poland.

2\. Find the cell nearest to the person's age, cholesterol and BP
values, bearing in mind that risk will be higher as the person
approaches the next age, cholesterol or BP category. 3. Check the
qualifiers 4. Establish the total 10 year risk for fatal CVD.

Note that a low total cardiovascular risk in a young person may conceal
a high relative risk; this may be explained to the person by using the
relative risk chart. As the person ages, a high relative risk will
translate into a high total risk. More intensive lifestyle advice will
be needed in such persons. This chart refers to relative risk, not
percentage risk, so that a person in the top right corner is at 12 times
higher risk than a person in the bottom left corner. Another approach to
explaining risk to younger persons is to use cardiovascular risk age.
For example, in the high risk chart, a 40 year old male hypertensive
smoker has a risk of 4%, which is the same as a 65 year old with no risk
factors, so that his risk age is 65. This can be reduced by reducing his
risk factors.

Non-Smoker

Smoker

180 3 160 2

3

4

5

6

6

7

8 10 12

3

3

4

4

4

5

6

7

140

1

2

2

2

3

3

3

4

5

6

120

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

3

3

4

4

5

6

7

8

4

5

6

7

8

Cholesterol (mmol/L)

Visit www.heartscore.org For the interactive version of the SCORE risk
charts Source: European Guidelines on CVD Prevention in Clinical
Practice 2016 Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2016 Jul;23(11):NP1-NP96. doi:
10.1177/2047487316653709

8

©ESC 2018

1\. Use the low risk charts in Andorra, Austria, Belgium\*, Cyprus,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece\*, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, The Netherlands\*, Norway, Portugal,
San Marino, Slovenia, Spain\*, Sweden\*, Switzerland and the United
Kingdom.

Risk estimation using SCORE: Qualifiers

Relative Risk Charts

Systolic Blood Pressure (mmHg)

How do I use the SCORE charts to assess CVD risk in asymptomatic
persons?

• The charts should be used in the light of the clinician's knowledge
and judgement, especially with regard to local conditions. • As with all
risk estimation systems, risk will be over-estimated in countries with a
falling CVD mortality rate, and under estimated if it is rising. • At
any given age, risk appears lower for women than men. However,
inspection of the charts shows that their risk is merely deferred by 10
years, with a 60 year old woman resembling a 50 year old man in terms of
risk. • Risk may be higher than indicated in the chart in: - Sedentary
or obese subjects, especially those with central obesity - Those with a
strong family history of premature CVD - Socially deprived individuals
and those from some ethnic minorities - Individuals with diabetes- the
SCORE charts should only be used in those with type 1 diabetes without
target-organ damage; Other diabetic subjects are already at high to very
high risk - Those with low HDL cholesterol\* or increased triglyceride,
fibrinogen, apoB, Lp(a) levels and perhaps increased high-sensitivity
CRP. - Asymptomatic subjects with evidence of pre-clinical
atherosclerosis, for example plaque on ultrasonography. - Those with
moderate to severe chronic kidney disease (GFR \<60 mL/min/1.73 m2)
\*Note that HDL cholesterol impacts on risk in both sexes, at all ages,
and at all level of risk. This effect can be estimated using the
electronic version of SCORE, HeartScore, which has been updated to
include HDL cholesterol level.

STROKE RISK ASSESSMENT DIRECTIONS:

1\. 2. 3.

For each risk factor, select the box (higher risk or lower risk) that
applies to you. Select only one box per risk factor. Enter a 1 on the
blank line next to each checked box. Add up your total for each vertical
column.

RISK FACTORS\*

HIGHER RISK

LOWER RISK

Is your blood pressure greater than 120/80 mm/Hg?



Yes or Unknown \_\_\_\_\_\_\_



No \_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Have you been diagnosed with atrial fibrillation?



Yes or Unknown \_\_\_\_\_\_\_



No \_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Is your blood sugar greater than 100 mg/dL?



Yes or Unknown \_\_\_\_\_\_\_



No \_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Is your body mass index greater than 25 kg/m2?



Yes or Unknown \_\_\_\_\_\_\_



No \_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Is your diet high in saturated fat, trans fat, sweetened beverages,
salt, excess calories\*\*?



Yes or Unknown \_\_\_\_\_\_\_



No \_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Is your total blood cholesterol greater than 160 mg/dL?



Yes or Unknown \_\_\_\_\_\_\_



No \_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Have you been diagnosed with diabetes mellitus?



Yes or Unknown \_\_\_\_\_\_\_



No \_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Do you get less than 150 minutes of moderate to vigorous-intensity
activity per week?



Yes or Unknown \_\_\_\_\_\_\_



No \_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Do you have a personal or family history of stroke, TIA or heart attack?



Yes or Unknown \_\_\_\_\_\_\_



No \_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Do you use tobacco or vape?



Yes or Unknown \_\_\_\_\_\_\_



No \_\_\_\_\_\_\_

TOTAL SCORE (add your points for each column) \*Some stroke risk factors
cannot be changed such as age, family history, race, gender, and prior
stroke.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\*\*Excess calories means eating more than your body can burn off in a
day.

STROKE RISK ASSESSMENT RESULTS If you scored higher in the "higher
risk" column or you are unsure of your risk, ask your health care
professional about how you can reduce your risk. Stroke is largely
preventable, treatable and beatable.

Stroke is an EMERGENCY. Call 911 immediately if these signs are present:

Other stroke symptoms include sudden: • Numbness or weakness of face,
arm, or leg, especially on one side of the body • Confusion, trouble
speaking or understanding speech • Trouble seeing in one or both eyes •
Trouble walking, dizziness, loss of balance or coordination

By learning and sharing the F.A.S.T. warning signs, you can help defeat
stroke. Learn more at stroke.org

• Severe headache with no known cause © Copyright 2022 American Heart
Association, Inc., a 501(c)(3) not-for profit. All rights reserved.
American Stroke Association is a registered trademark of the AHA.
Unauthorized use prohibited. WF_84295 12/22


